advisors who contributed to this process are listed in the Appendix.
Revisions to DSM-5
DSM-5 Iterative Revision Process
Advances in digital publishing that allow timely dissemination of changes have paved the way
for the American Psychiatric Association to adopt an iterative improvement model for DSM, in
which revisions are pegged to specific scientific advances. The DSM Steering Committee
(analogous to the DSM-5 Task Force) was appointed in Spring 2014, with Paul S. Appelbaum,
M.D., as Chair and Ellen Leibenluft, M.D., and Kenneth Kendler, M.D., as Vice Chairs, to
oversee the iterative revision process, along with the establishment of a web portal
(www.dsm5.org) to field proposals on a continuous basis. Proposed changes can include the
addition of new disorders and deletion or modification of diagnostic criteria sets in Sections II
and III of DSM-5, as well as changes to the text. Submissions must be accompanied by
supportive information in a structured format, including the reasons for the change, the
magnitude of change, data documenting improvements in validity across a range of validators,
evidence of reliability and clinical utility, and consideration of current or potential deleterious
consequences associated with the proposed change.
Approaches to validating diagnostic criteria for categorical mental disorders have included
the following types of evidence: antecedent validators (similar genetic markers, family traits,
temperament, and environmental exposure), concurrent validators (similar neural substrates,
biomarkers, emotional and cognitive processing, and symptom similarity), and predictive
validators (similar clinical course and treatment response). New criteria for current disorders are
adopted if they produce improvement in some of these classes of validators. Furthermore, new
disorders are added to DSM if they are shown to be valid by a substantial subset of these
validators as well as meet the criteria for a mental disorder and demonstrate clinical utility.
Proposals submitted to the DSM web portal undergo an initial review by the Steering
Committee to determine whether the evidence for the proposal, on its face, appears substantially
likely to meet the criteria for approval. If so, the proposal is referred to one of the five standing
Review Committees (functionally analogous to the DSM Work Groups), which cover broad
domains of psychiatric diagnosis. On receipt of a proposal from the Steering Committee, the
assigned Review Committee considers the evidence in support of the proposed change, requests
additional information if necessary, and returns the proposal to the Steering Committee with
recommendations for disposition and, in some cases, suggested modifications. If the Steering
Committee concurs that sufficient evidence appears to exist in support of the proposal, the
proposed revision is posted on the DSM-5 website for public comment. The final stage involves
making necessary adjustments based on the comments and then forwarding the final version to
the APA Assembly and Board of Trustees for their approval. Once approved, the online version
of the manual (see https://psychiatryonline.org) is updated to reflect the changes. All changes
that have been approved since the publication of DSM-5 in 2013 are included in DSM-5-TR.
DSM-5 Text Revision Process
In Spring 2019, APA started work on DSM-5-TR, with Michael B. First, M.D., and Philip Wang,
M.D., Dr.P.H., as Revision Subcommittee Co-Chairs and Wilson M. Compton, M.D., and Daniel
