indifference. They generally fail to compensate or make amends for their behavior. They may
believe that everyone is out to “help number one” and that one should stop at nothing to avoid
being pushed around.
The antisocial behavior must not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia or
bipolar disorder (Criterion D).
Associated Features
Individuals with antisocial personality disorder frequently lack empathy and tend to be callous,
cynical, and contemptuous of the feelings, rights, and sufferings of others. They may have an
inflated and arrogant self-appraisal (e.g., feel that ordinary work is beneath them or lack a
realistic concern about their current problems or their future) and may be excessively
opinionated, self-assured, or cocky. Some antisocial individuals may display a glib, superficial
charm and can be quite voluble and verbally facile (e.g., using technical terms or jargon that
might impress someone who is unfamiliar with the topic). Lack of
750
empathy, inflated self-appraisal, and superficial charm are features that have been commonly
included in traditional conceptions of psychopathy that may be particularly distinguishing of the
disorder and more predictive of recidivism in prison or forensic settings, where criminal,
delinquent, or aggressive acts are likely to be nonspecific. These individuals may also be
irresponsible and exploitative in their sexual relationships. They may have a history of many
sexual partners and may never have sustained a monogamous relationship. They may be
irresponsible as parents, as evidenced by malnutrition of a child, an illness in the child resulting
from a lack of minimal hygiene, a child’s dependence on neighbors or nonresident relatives for
food or shelter, a failure to arrange for a caretaker for a young child when the individual is away
from home, or repeated squandering of money required for household necessities. These
individuals may receive dishonorable discharges from the armed services, may fail to be self-
supporting, may become impoverished or even homeless, or may spend many years in penal
institutions. Individuals with antisocial personality disorder are more likely than individuals in
the general population to die prematurely from natural causes and suicide.
Prevalence
The estimated prevalence of antisocial personality disorder based on a probability subsample
from Part II of the National Comorbidity Survey Replication was 0.6%.The prevalence of
antisocial personality disorder in the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related
Conditions data was 3.6%. A review of seven epidemiological studies (six in the United States)
found a median prevalence of 3.6%. The highest prevalence of antisocial personality disorder
(greater than 70%) is among samples of men with the most severe alcohol use disorders and from
substance abuse clinics, prisons, or other forensic settings. Lifetime prevalence appears to be
similar across non-Latinx White and Black individuals and lower in Latinx and Asian
Americans. Prevalence may be higher in samples affected by adverse socioeconomic (i.e.,
poverty) or sociocultural (i.e., migration) factors.
