Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Development and Course
Antisocial personality disorder has a chronic course but may become less evident or remit as the
individual grows older, often by age 40. Although this remission tends to be particularly evident
with respect to engaging in criminal behavior, there is likely to be a decrease in the full spectrum
of antisocial behaviors and substance use. By definition, antisocial personality cannot be
diagnosed before age 18 years.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Child abuse or neglect, unstable or erratic parenting, or inconsistent parental
discipline may increase the likelihood that conduct disorder will evolve into antisocial
personality disorder.
Antisocial personality disorder is more common among the first-degree
biological relatives of those with the disorder than in the general population. Biological relatives
of individuals with this disorder are also at increased risk for somatization disorder (a diagnosis
that was replaced in DSM-5 with somatic symptom disorder) and substance use disorders.
Within a family that has a member with antisocial personality disorder, males more often have
antisocial personality disorder and substance use disorders, whereas females more often have
somatization disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Antisocial personality disorder has been associated with low socioeconomic status and urban
settings. The diagnosis may at times be misapplied to individuals in settings in which
751
seemingly antisocial behavior may be part of a protective survival strategy (e.g., formation of
youth gangs in urban areas with high rates of violence and discrimination). Sociocultural
contexts with high rates of child maltreatment or exposure to violence also tend to have elevated
prevalence of antisocial behaviors, suggesting either a potential risk factor for the development
of antisocial personality disorder or an adverse environment that evokes reactive and contextual
antisocial behaviors that do not represent pervasive and enduring traits consistent with a
personality disorder. In assessing antisocial traits, it is helpful for the clinician to consider the
social and economic context in which the behaviors occur. In the National Epidemiologic Survey
on Alcohol and Related Conditions, prevalence appears to vary across U.S. ethnic and racialized
groups, possibly because of a combination of true prevalence differences, measurement artifacts,
and the impact of adverse environments that generate behaviors that resemble those of antisocial
personality disorder but are instead reactive and contextual. Individuals from some socially
oppressed groups may be at higher risk for misdiagnosis or overdiagnosis of antisocial
personality disorder because they are more likely to be misdiagnosed with conduct disorder in
adolescence, which is a requirement for a diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Antisocial personality disorder is three times as common in men than in women. Women with
