Substance use disorders.
Schizophrenia and bipolar disorders.
Other personality disorders.
antisocial personality disorder are more likely to have experienced childhood and adult adverse
experiences such as sexual abuse compared with men. Clinical presentation may vary, with men
more often presenting with irritability/aggression and reckless disregard for the safety of others
compared with women. Comorbid substance use disorders are more common in men, while
comorbid mood and anxiety disorders are more common in women. There has been some
concern that antisocial personality disorder may be underdiagnosed in females, particularly
because of the emphasis on aggressive items in the definition of conduct disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
The diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder is not given to individuals younger than 18 years
and is given only if there is evidence of conduct disorder before age 15 years. For individuals
older than 18 years, a diagnosis of conduct disorder is given only if the criteria for antisocial
personality disorder are not met.
When antisocial behavior in an adult is associated with a substance use
disorder, the diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder is not made unless the signs of antisocial
personality disorder were also present in childhood and have continued into adulthood. When
substance use and antisocial behavior both began in childhood and continued into adulthood,
both a substance use disorder and antisocial personality disorder should be diagnosed if the
criteria for both are met, even though some antisocial acts may be a consequence of the
substance use disorder (e.g., illegal selling of drugs, thefts to obtain money for drugs).
Antisocial behavior that occurs exclusively during the course
of schizophrenia or a bipolar disorder should not be diagnosed as antisocial personality disorder.
Other personality disorders may be confused with antisocial
personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is therefore important to
distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic features. However,
if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders in
addition to antisocial personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Individuals with antisocial
personality disorder and narcissistic personality disorder share a tendency to be tough-minded,
glib, superficial, exploitative, and lack empathy. However,
752
narcissistic personality disorder does not include characteristics of impulsivity, aggression, and
deceit. In addition, individuals with antisocial personality disorder may not be as needy of the
admiration and envy of others, and persons with narcissistic personality disorder usually lack the
history of conduct disorder in childhood or criminal behavior in adulthood. Individuals with
antisocial personality disorder and histrionic personality disorder share a tendency to be
impulsive, superficial, excitement seeking, reckless, seductive, and manipulative, but persons
with histrionic personality disorder tend to be more exaggerated in their emotions and do not
characteristically engage in antisocial behaviors. Individuals with histrionic and borderline
personality disorders are manipulative to gain nurturance, whereas those with antisocial
personality disorder are manipulative to gain profit, power, or some other material gratification.
Individuals with antisocial personality disorder tend to be less emotionally unstable and more
aggressive than those with borderline personality disorder. Although antisocial behavior may be
