Criminal behavior not associated with a mental disorder.
F60.3
present in some individuals with paranoid personality disorder, it is not usually motivated by a
desire for personal gain or to exploit others as in antisocial personality disorder, but rather is
more often attributable to a desire for revenge.
Antisocial personality disorder must be
distinguished from antisocial behavior not due to a mental disorder, for example, criminal
behavior undertaken for gain that is not accompanied by the personality features characteristic of
this disorder. In these cases, the condition adult antisocial behavior may be coded (see “Other
Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention”).
Comorbidity
Individuals with antisocial personality disorder may also experience dysphoria, including
complaints of tension, inability to tolerate boredom, and depressed mood. They may have
associated anxiety disorders, mood disorders, substance use disorders, somatic symptom
disorder, and gambling disorder. Individuals with antisocial personality disorder also often have
personality features that meet criteria for other personality disorders, particularly borderline,
histrionic, and narcissistic personality disorders. The likelihood of developing antisocial
personality disorder in adult life is increased if the individual experienced childhood onset of
conduct disorder (before age 10 years) and accompanying attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder.
Borderline Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A pervasive pattern of instability of interpersonal relationships, self-image, and
affects, and marked impulsivity, beginning by early adulthood and present in a
variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following:
1. Frantic efforts to avoid real or imagined abandonment. (Note: Do not include
suicidal or self-mutilating behavior covered in Criterion 5.)
2. A pattern of unstable and intense interpersonal relationships characterized by
alternating between extremes of idealization and devaluation.
3. Identity disturbance: markedly and persistently unstable self-image or sense of
self.
4. Impulsivity in at least two areas that are potentially self-damaging (e.g.,
spending, sex, substance abuse, reckless driving, binge eating). (Note: Do not
include suicidal or self-mutilating behavior covered in Criterion 5.)
5. Recurrent suicidal behavior, gestures, or threats, or self-mutilating behavior.
753
6. Affective instability due to a marked reactivity of mood (e.g., intense episodic
dysphoria, irritability, or anxiety usually lasting a few hours and only rarely more
