than a few days).
7. Chronic feelings of emptiness.
8. Inappropriate, intense anger or difficulty controlling anger (e.g., frequent displays
of temper, constant anger, recurrent physical fights).
9. Transient, stress-related paranoid ideation or severe dissociative symptoms.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of borderline personality disorder is a pervasive pattern of instability of
interpersonal relationships, self-image, and affects, and marked impulsivity that begins by early
adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with borderline personality disorder make frantic efforts to avoid real or
imagined abandonment (Criterion 1). The perception of impending separation or rejection, or the
loss of external structure, can lead to profound changes in self-image, affect, cognition, and
behavior. These individuals are very sensitive to environmental circumstances. They experience
intense abandonment fears and inappropriate anger even when faced with a realistic time-limited
separation or when there are unavoidable changes in plans (e.g., sudden despair in reaction to a
clinician’s announcing the end of the hour; panic or fury when someone important to them is just
a few minutes late or must cancel an appointment). They may believe that this “abandonment”
implies they are “bad.” These abandonment fears are related to an intolerance of being alone and
a need to have other people with them. Their frantic efforts to avoid abandonment may include
impulsive actions such as self-mutilating or suicidal behaviors, which are described separately in
Criterion 5 (see also “Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior”).
Individuals with borderline personality disorder have a pattern of unstable and intense
relationships (Criterion 2). They may idealize potential caregivers or lovers at the first or second
meeting, demand to spend a lot of time together, and share the most intimate details early in a
relationship. However, they may switch quickly from idealizing other people to devaluing them,
feeling that the other person does not care enough, does not give enough, or is not “there”
enough. These individuals can empathize with and nurture other people, but only with the
expectation that the other person will “be there” in return to meet their own needs on demand.
These individuals are prone to sudden and dramatic shifts in their view of others, who may
alternatively be seen as beneficent supports or as cruelly punitive. Such shifts often reflect
disillusionment with a caregiver whose nurturing qualities had been idealized or whose rejection
or abandonment is expected.
There may be an identity disturbance characterized by markedly and persistently unstable
self-image or sense of self (Criterion 3). There are sudden and dramatic shifts in self-image (e.g.,
suddenly changing from the role of a needy supplicant for help to that of a righteous avenger of
past mistreatment). Although they usually have a self-image that is based on the feeling of being
bad or evil, individuals with this disorder may at times have feelings that they do not exist at all.
This can be both painful and frightening to those with this disorder. Such experiences usually
occur in situations in which the individual feels a lack of a meaningful relationship, nurturing,
and support. These individuals may show worse performance in unstructured work or school
situations. This lack of a full and enduring identity makes it difficult for the individual with
borderline personality disorder to identify maladaptive patterns of behavior and can lead to
repetitive patterns of troubled relationships.
