Individuals with borderline personality disorder display impulsivity in at least two areas that
are potentially self-damaging (Criterion 4). They may gamble, spend money irresponsibly, binge
eat, abuse substances, engage in unsafe sex, or drive recklessly.
754
Individuals with this disorder display recurrent suicidal behavior, gestures, or threats, or self-
mutilating behavior (Criterion 5). Recurrent suicidal thoughts or behavior are often the reason
that these individuals present for help. These self-destructive acts are usually precipitated by
threats of separation or rejection or by expectations that the individual assume increased
responsibility. Self-mutilative acts (e.g., cutting or burning) are very common and may occur
during periods in which the individual is experiencing dissociative symptoms. These acts often
bring relief by reaffirming the individual’s ability to feel or by expiating the individual’s sense of
being evil.
Individuals with borderline personality disorder may display affective instability that is due
to a marked reactivity of mood (e.g., intense episodic dysphoria, irritability, or anxiety usually
lasting a few hours and only rarely more than a few days) (Criterion 6). The basic dysphoric
mood of those with borderline personality disorder is often disrupted by periods of anger, panic,
or despair and is rarely relieved by periods of well-being or satisfaction. These episodes may
reflect the individual’s extreme reactivity to interpersonal stresses.
Individuals with borderline personality disorder may be troubled by chronic feelings of
emptiness, which can co-occur with painful feelings of aloneness (Criterion 7). Easily bored,
they may frequently seek excitement to avoid their feelings of emptiness.
Individuals with this disorder frequently express inappropriate, intense anger or have
difficulty controlling their anger (Criterion 8). They may display extreme sarcasm, enduring
bitterness, or verbal outbursts. The anger is often elicited when a caregiver or lover is seen as
neglectful, withholding, uncaring, or abandoning. Such expressions of anger are often followed
by shame and guilt and contribute to the feeling they have of being evil.
During periods of extreme stress, transient paranoid ideation or dissociative symptoms (e.g.,
depersonalization) may occur (Criterion 9), but these are generally of insufficient severity or
duration to warrant an additional diagnosis. These episodes occur most frequently in response to
a real or imagined abandonment. Symptoms tend to be transient, lasting minutes or hours. The
real or perceived return of the caregiver’s nurturance may result in a remission of symptoms.
Associated Features
Individuals with borderline personality disorder may have a pattern of undermining themselves
at the moment a goal is about to be realized (e.g., dropping out of school just before graduation;
regressing severely after a discussion of how well therapy is going; destroying a good
relationship just when it is clear that the relationship could last). Some individuals develop
psychotic-like symptoms (e.g., hallucinations, body-image distortions, ideas of reference,
hypnagogic phenomena) during times of stress. Individuals with this disorder may feel more
secure with transitional objects (i.e., a pet or inanimate possession) than in interpersonal
relationships. Premature death from suicide may occur in individuals with borderline personality
disorder, especially in those with co-occurring depressive disorders or substance use disorders.
