Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
However, deaths from other causes. such as accidents or illness, are more than twice as common
as deaths by suicide in individuals with borderline personality disorder. Physical handicaps may
result from self-inflicted abuse behaviors or failed suicide attempts. Recurrent job losses,
interrupted education, and separation or divorce are common. Physical and sexual abuse, neglect,
hostile conflict, and early parental loss are more common in the childhood histories of those with
borderline personality disorder.
Prevalence
The estimated prevalence of borderline personality disorder based on a probability subsample
from Part II of the National Comorbidity Survey Replication was 1.4%. The prevalence of
borderline personality disorder in the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related
Conditions data was 5.9%. A review of seven epidemiological studies (six in
755
the United States) found a median prevalence of 2.7%. The prevalence of borderline personality
disorder is about 6% in primary care settings, about 10% among individuals seen in outpatient
mental health clinics, and about 20% among psychiatric inpatients.
Development and Course
Borderline personality disorder has typically been thought of as an adult-onset disorder.
However, it has been found in treatment settings that symptoms in adolescents as young as age
12 or 13 years can meet full criteria for the disorder. It is not yet known what percentage of
adults first entering treatment actually have such an early onset of borderline personality
disorder.
Borderline personality disorder has long been thought of as a disorder with a poor
symptomatic course, which tended to lessen in severity as those with borderline personality
disorder entered their 30s and 40s. However, prospective follow-up studies have found that
stable remissions of 1–8 years are very common. Impulsive symptoms of borderline personality
disorder remit the most rapidly, while affective symptoms remit at a substantially slower rate. In
contrast, recovery from borderline personality disorder (i.e., concurrent symptomatic remission
and good psychosocial functioning) is more difficult to achieve and less stable over time. Lack of
recovery is associated with supporting oneself on disability benefits and suffering from poor
physical health.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Borderline personality disorder has also been found to be associated with high
rates of various forms of reported childhood abuse and emotional neglect. However, reported
rates of sexual abuse are higher in inpatients than in outpatients with this disorder, suggesting
that a history of sexual abuse is as much a risk factor for severity of borderline psychopathology
as it is for the disorder itself. In addition, an empirically based consensus has arisen that suggests
that a childhood history of reported sexual abuse is neither necessary nor sufficient for the
development of borderline personality disorder.
Borderline personality disorder is about five times more common
