Depressive and bipolar disorders.
among first-degree biological relatives of those with the disorder than in the general population.
There is also an increased familial risk for substance use disorders, anxiety disorders, antisocial
personality disorder, and depressive or bipolar disorders.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The pattern of behavior seen in borderline personality disorder has been identified in many
settings around the world. Sociocultural contexts characterized by social demands that evoke
attempts at self-affirmation and acceptance by others, ambiguous or conflictual relationships
with authority figures, or marked uncertainties in adaptation can foster impulsivity, emotional
instability, explosive or aggressive behaviors, and dissociative experiences that are associated
with borderline personality disorder or with transient and contextual reactions to those
environments that can be confused with borderline personality disorder. Given that
psychodynamic, cognitive, behavioral, and mindfulness aspects of models of mind and self vary
cross-culturally, symptoms or traits that suggest the presence of borderline personality disorder
(e.g., number of sexual partners, shifting between relationships, substance use) must be evaluated
in light of cultural norms to make a valid diagnosis.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
While borderline personality disorder is more common among women than men in clinical
samples, community samples demonstrate no difference in prevalence between men and women.
This discrepancy may reflect a higher degree of help-seeking among women,
756
leading them to clinical settings. Clinical characteristics of men and women with borderline
personality disorder appear to be similar, with potentially a higher degree of externalizing
behaviors in boys and men and internalizing behaviors in girls and women.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
ln a longitudinal study, impulsive and antisocial behaviors of individuals with borderline
personality disorder were associated with increased suicide risk. In a sample of hospitalized
patients with borderline personality disorder followed prospectively for 24 years, around 6%
died by suicide, compared with 1.4% in a comparison sample of individuals with personality
disorders other than borderline personality disorder. A study of individuals with borderline
personality disorder followed for 10 years found that recurrent suicidal behavior was a defining
characteristic of borderline personality disorder, associated with declining rates of suicide
attempts from 79% to 13% over time.
Differential Diagnosis
Borderline personality disorder often co-occurs with depressive
or bipolar disorders, and when criteria for both are met, both should be diagnosed. Because the
cross-sectional presentation of borderline personality disorder can be mimicked by an episode of
depressive or bipolar disorder, the clinician should avoid giving an additional diagnosis of
