Separation anxiety disorder in adults.
Other personality disorders.
Personality change due to another medical condition.
Substance use disorders.
Identity problems.
borderline personality disorder based only on cross-sectional presentation without having
documented that the pattern of behavior had an early onset and a long-standing course.
Separation anxiety disorder and borderline personality
disorder are characterized by fear of abandonment by loved ones, but problems in identity, self-
direction, interpersonal functioning, and impulsivity are additionally central to borderline
personality disorder.
Other personality disorders may be confused with borderline
personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is therefore important to
distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic features. However,
if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders in
addition to borderline personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Although histrionic personality
disorder can also be characterized by attention seeking, manipulative behavior, and rapidly
shifting emotions, borderline personality disorder is distinguished by self-destructiveness, angry
disruptions in close relationships, and chronic feelings of deep emptiness and loneliness.
Paranoid ideas or illusions may be present in both borderline personality disorder and
schizotypal personality disorder, but these symptoms are more transient, interpersonally reactive,
and responsive to external structuring in borderline personality disorder. Although paranoid
personality disorder and narcissistic personality disorder may also be characterized by an angry
reaction to minor stimuli, the relative stability of self-image, as well as the relative lack of
physical self-destructiveness, repetitive impulsivity, and profound abandonment concerns,
distinguishes these disorders from borderline personality disorder. Although antisocial
personality disorder and borderline personality disorder are both characterized by manipulative
behavior, individuals with antisocial personality disorder are manipulative to gain profit, power,
or some other material gratification, whereas the goal in borderline personality disorder is
directed more toward gaining the concern of caretakers. Both dependent personality disorder and
borderline personality disorder are characterized by fear of abandonment; however, the
individual with borderline personality disorder reacts to abandonment with feelings of emotional
emptiness, rage, and demands, whereas the individual with dependent personality disorder reacts
with increasing appeasement and submissiveness and urgently seeks a replacement relationship
to provide caregiving and support. Borderline personality disorder can
757
further be distinguished from dependent personality disorder by the typical pattern of unstable
and intense relationships.
Borderline 
personality 
disorder 
must 
be
distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in which the traits that
emerge are a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
Borderline personality disorder must also be distinguished from
symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use.
Borderline personality disorder should be distinguished from an identity
problem, which is reserved for identity concerns related to a developmental phase (e.g.,
adolescence) and does not qualify as a mental disorder. Adolescents and young adults with
identity problems (especially when accompanied by substance use) may transiently display
