F60.4
behaviors that misleadingly give the impression of borderline personality disorder. Such
situations are characterized by emotional instability, existential dilemmas, uncertainty, anxiety-
provoking choices, conflicts about sexual orientation, and competing social pressures to decide
on careers.
Comorbidity
Common co-occurring disorders include depressive and bipolar disorders, substance use
disorders, anxiety disorders (particularly panic disorder and social anxiety disorder), eating
disorders (notably bulimia nervosa and binge-eating disorder), posttraumatic stress disorder, and
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Borderline personality disorder also frequently co-occurs
with the other personality disorders.
Histrionic Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A pervasive pattern of excessive emotionality and attention seeking, beginning by
early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of
the following:
1. Is uncomfortable in situations in which he or she is not the center of attention.
2. Interaction with others is often characterized by inappropriate sexually seductive
or provocative behavior.
3. Displays rapidly shifting and shallow expression of emotions.
4. Consistently uses physical appearance to draw attention to self.
5. Has a style of speech that is excessively impressionistic and lacking in detail.
6. Shows self-dramatization, theatricality, and exaggerated expression of emotion.
7. Is suggestible (i.e., easily influenced by others or circumstances).
8. Considers relationships to be more intimate than they actually are.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of histrionic personality disorder is pervasive and excessive emotionality
and attention-seeking behavior. This pattern begins by early adulthood and is present in a variety
of contexts.
Individuals with histrionic personality disorder are uncomfortable or feel unappreciated when
they are not the center of attention (Criterion 1). Often lively and dramatic, they tend to draw
attention to themselves and may initially charm new acquaintances by their enthusiasm, apparent
openness, or flirtatiousness. These qualities wear thin, however, as these individuals continually
demand to be the center of attention. They commandeer the
758
role of “the life of the party.” If they are not the center of attention, they may do something
