S. Pine, M.D., as Revision Subcommittee Vice Chairs. The DSM-5-TR development effort
involved more than 200 experts (the majority of whom were involved in the development of
DSM-5), who were given the task of conducting literature reviews covering the past 10 years and
reviewing the text to identify out-of-date material. A review of
11
conflicts of interest for all proposed changes to the text was conducted to eliminate any possible
compromise of the objectivity of the content. Mirroring the structure of the DSM-5 process,
experts were divided into 20 Disorder review groups, each headed by a section editor. Four
cross-cutting review groups (Culture, Sex and Gender, Suicide, and Forensic) reviewed all the
chapters, focusing on material involving their specific expertise. The text was also reviewed by a
work group on Ethnoracial Equity and Inclusion to ensure appropriate attention to risk factors
such as racism and discrimination and the use of nonstigmatizing language. Although the scope
of the text revision did not include conceptual changes to the criteria sets, some necessary
clarifications to certain diagnostic criteria became apparent during the review of the text.
Proposals for changes in diagnostic criteria or specifier definitions that were a result of the text
revision process were reviewed and approved by the DSM Steering Committee, as well as the
APA Assembly and Board of Trustees, as part of the DSM-5 iterative revision process described
in the prior section.
Changes in DSM-5 Organizational Structure
DSM is a medical classification of disorders and as such serves as a historically determined
cognitive schema imposed on clinical and scientific information to increase its comprehensibility
and utility. The classification of disorders (the way in which disorders are grouped) provides a
high-level organization for the manual.
Regrouping of Disorders in DSM-5
Members of the DSM-5 diagnostic spectra study group examined whether scientific validators
could inform possible new groupings of related disorders within the existing categorical
framework. Eleven such indicators were recommended by the study group for this purpose (i.e.,
their ability to meaningfully separate groups of psychiatric illness from each other): neural
substrates, family traits, genetic risk factors, specific environmental risk factors, biomarkers,
temperamental antecedents, abnormalities of emotional or cognitive processing, symptom
similarity, course of illness, high comorbidity, and shared treatment response. These indicators
served the study group as empirical guidelines to inform decision-making by the work groups
and the task force about how to cluster disorders to maximize their validity and clinical utility
(i.e., the more likely that disorders shared these validators, the more likely they would be in the
same diagnostic grouping).
A series of papers was developed and published in a prominent international journal
(Psychological Medicine, Vol. 39, 2009) as part of both the DSM-5 and the ICD-11
developmental processes to document that such validators were most useful for suggesting large
