dramatic (e.g., make up stories, create a scene) to draw the focus of attention to themselves. This
need is often apparent in their behavior with a clinician (e.g., being flattering, bringing gifts,
providing dramatic descriptions of physical and psychological symptoms that are replaced by
new symptoms each visit).
The appearance and behavior of individuals with this disorder are often inappropriately
sexually provocative or seductive (Criterion 2). This behavior not only is directed toward persons
in whom the individual has a sexual or romantic interest but also occurs in a wide variety of
social, occupational, and professional relationships beyond what is appropriate for the social
context. Emotional expression may be shallow and rapidly shifting (Criterion 3). Individuals
with this disorder consistently use physical appearance to draw attention to themselves (Criterion
4). They are overly concerned with impressing others by their appearance and expend an
excessive amount of time, energy, and money on clothes and grooming. They may “fish for
compliments” regarding appearance and may be easily and excessively upset by a critical
comment about how they look or by a photograph that they regard as unflattering.
These individuals have a style of speech that is excessively impressionistic and lacking in
detail (Criterion 5). Strong opinions are expressed with dramatic flair, but underlying rationales
are usually vague and diffuse, without supporting facts and details. For example, an individual
with histrionic personality disorder may comment that a certain individual is a wonderful human
being, yet be unable to provide any specific examples of good qualities to support this opinion.
Individuals with this disorder are characterized by self-dramatization, theatricality, and an
exaggerated expression of emotion (Criterion 6). They may embarrass friends and acquaintances
by an excessive public display of emotions (e.g., embracing casual acquaintances with excessive
ardor, sobbing uncontrollably on minor sentimental occasions, having temper tantrums).
However, their emotions often seem to be turned on and off too quickly to be deeply felt, which
may lead others to accuse the individual of faking these feelings.
Individuals with histrionic personality disorder have a high degree of suggestibility (Criterion
7). Their opinions and feelings are easily influenced by others and by current fads. They may be
overly trusting, especially of strong authority figures whom they see as magically solving their
problems. They have a tendency to play hunches and to adopt convictions quickly. Individuals
with this disorder often consider relationships more intimate than they actually are, describing
almost every acquaintance as “my dear, dear friend” or referring to physicians met only once or
twice under professional circumstances by their first names (Criterion 8).
Associated Features
Impairment in general tends to be lower in histrionic personality disorder than in many other
personality disorders. However, the impairment most associated with histrionic personality
disorder appears to be interpersonal in nature. Individuals with histrionic personality disorder
have an interpersonal style characterized by social dominance, which can span a spectrum of
behaviors that include a “warmer dominance” that can be intrusive in nature (e.g., need to be
center of attention; exhibitionistic) to a “colder dominance” that can include arrogant,
controlling, and aggressive behaviors. Romantic relationships appear to be particularly impaired,
with evidence suggesting that individuals with histrionic personality disorder symptoms are more
likely to get divorced or never get married. Individuals with histrionic personality disorder may
have difficulty achieving emotional intimacy in romantic or sexual relationships. Individuals
