with this disorder often have impaired relationships with same-sex friends because their sexually
provocative interpersonal style may seem a threat to their friends’ relationships. These
individuals may also alienate friends with demands for constant attention. They often become
depressed and
759
upset when they are not the center of attention. They may crave novelty, stimulation, and
excitement and have a tendency to become bored with their usual routine. These individuals are
often intolerant of, or frustrated by, situations that involve delayed gratification, and their actions
are often directed at obtaining immediate satisfaction. Although they often initiate a job or
project with great enthusiasm, their interest may lag quickly. Longer-term relationships may be
neglected to make way for the excitement of new relationships.
Prevalence
The estimated prevalence of histrionic personality disorder based on a probability subsample
from Part II of the National Comorbidity Survey Replication was 0.0%.The prevalence of
histrionic personality disorder in the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related
Conditions data was 1.8%. A review of five epidemiological studies (four in the United States)
found a median prevalence of 0.9%.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Norms for interpersonal behavior, personal appearance, and emotional expressiveness vary
widely across cultures, genders, and age groups. Before considering the various traits (e.g.,
emotionality, seductiveness, dramatic interpersonal style, novelty seeking, sociability, charm,
impressionability, a tendency to somatization) to be evidence of histrionic personality disorder, it
is important to evaluate whether they cause clinically significant impairment or distress. The
presence of histrionic personality disorder should be distinguished from reactive and contextual
expression of these traits, arising in response to socialization pressures in competitive peer
groups, including the “need to be liked,” that do not represent pervasive and enduring traits
consistent with a personality disorder.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
In clinical settings, this disorder has been diagnosed more frequently in females; however, the
gender ratio is not significantly different from the gender ratio of females within the respective
clinical setting. In contrast, some studies using structured assessments report similar prevalence
rates among males and females.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
The actual risk of suicide is not known, but clinical experience suggests that individuals with this
disorder may be at increased risk for suicidal gestures and threats.
Differential Diagnosis
