Other personality disorders and personality traits.
Personality change due to another medical condition.
Substance use disorders.
Other personality disorders may be confused with
histrionic personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is therefore
important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic
features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more
personality disorders in addition to histrionic personality disorder, all can be diagnosed.
Although borderline personality disorder can also be characterized by attention seeking,
manipulative behavior, and rapidly shifting emotions, it is distinguished by self-destructiveness,
angry disruptions in close relationships, and chronic feelings of deep emptiness and identity
disturbance. Individuals with antisocial personality disorder and histrionic personality disorder
share a tendency to be impulsive, superficial, excitement seeking, reckless, seductive, and
manipulative, but persons with histrionic personality disorder tend to be more exaggerated in
their emotions and do not characteristically engage in antisocial behaviors. Individuals with
histrionic personality disorder are manipulative to gain nurturance, whereas those with antisocial
personality disorder are manipu
760
lative to gain profit, power, or some other material gratification. Although individuals with
narcissistic personality disorder also crave attention from others, they usually want praise for
their “superiority,” whereas individuals with histrionic personality disorder are willing to be
viewed as fragile or dependent if this is instrumental in getting attention. Individuals with
narcissistic personality disorder may exaggerate the intimacy of their relationships with other
people, but they are more apt to emphasize the “VIP” status or wealth of their friends. In
dependent personality disorder, the individual is excessively dependent on others for praise and
guidance, but is without the flamboyant, exaggerated, emotional features of individuals with
histrionic personality disorder.
Many individuals may display histrionic personality traits. Only when these traits are
inflexible, maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or subjective
distress do they constitute histrionic personality disorder.
Histrionic 
personality 
disorder 
must 
be
distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in which the traits that
emerge are a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
The disorder must also be distinguished from symptoms that may
develop in association with persistent substance use.
Comorbidity
Histrionic personality disorder has been associated with higher rates of borderline, narcissistic,
paranoid, dependent, and antisocial personality disorders; alcohol and other substance use and
misuse; as well as aggression and violence. Histrionic personality disorder is also thought to be
related to somatic symptom disorder, functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion
disorder), and major depressive disorder.
Narcissistic Personality Disorder
