F60.81
Diagnostic Criteria
A pervasive pattern of grandiosity (in fantasy or behavior), need for admiration, and
lack of empathy, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts,
as indicated by five (or more) of the following:
1. Has a grandiose sense of self-importance (e.g., exaggerates achievements and
talents, expects to be recognized as superior without commensurate
achievements).
2. Is preoccupied with fantasies of unlimited success, power, brilliance, beauty, or
ideal love.
3. Believes that he or she is “special” and unique and can only be understood by, or
should associate with, other special or high-status people (or institutions).
4. Requires excessive admiration.
5. Has a sense of entitlement (i.e., unreasonable expectations of especially
favorable treatment or automatic compliance with his or her expectations).
6. Is interpersonally exploitative (i.e., takes advantage of others to achieve his or
her own ends).
7. Lacks empathy: is unwilling to recognize or identify with the feelings and needs
of others.
8. Is often envious of others or believes that others are envious of him or her.
9. Shows arrogant, haughty behaviors or attitudes.
761
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of narcissistic personality disorder is a pervasive pattern of grandiosity,
need for admiration, and lack of empathy that begins by early adulthood and is present in a
variety of contexts.
Individuals with this disorder have a grandiose sense of self-importance, which may be
manifest as an exaggerated or unrealistic sense of superiority, value, or capability (Criterion 1).
They tend to overestimate their abilities and amplify their accomplishments, often appearing
boastful and pretentious. They may blithely assume that others attribute the same value to their
efforts and may be surprised when the praise they expect and feel they deserve is not
forthcoming. Often implicit in the inflated judgments of their own accomplishments is an
underestimation or devaluation of the contributions of others. Individuals with narcissistic
personality disorder are often preoccupied with fantasies of unlimited success, power, brilliance,
beauty, or ideal love (Criterion 2). They may ruminate about “long overdue” admiration and
privilege and compare themselves favorably with famous or privileged people.
Individuals with narcissistic personality disorder believe that they are special or unique and
expect others to recognize them as such (Criterion 3). They can be surprised or even devastated
when the recognition of acclaim they expect and feel they deserve from others is not
forthcoming. They may feel that they can only be understood by, and should only associate with,
people of high status and may attribute “unique,” “perfect,” or “gifted” qualities to those with
