whom they associate. Individuals with this disorder believe that their needs are special and
beyond the ken of ordinary people. Their own self-esteem is enhanced (i.e., “mirrored”) by the
idealized value that they assign to those with whom they associate. They are likely to insist on
having only the “top” person (doctor, lawyer, hairdresser, instructor) or being affiliated with the
“best” institutions but may devalue the credentials of those who disappoint them.
Individuals with this disorder generally require excessive admiration (Criterion 4). Their self-
esteem is almost invariably very fragile, and their struggle with severe internal self-doubt, self-
criticism, and emptiness results in their need to actively seek others’ admiration. They may be
preoccupied with how well they are doing and how favorably they are regarded by others. They
may expect their arrival to be greeted with great fanfare and are astonished if others do not covet
their possessions. They may constantly fish for compliments, often with great charm.
A sense of entitlement, which is rooted in their distorted sense of self-worth, is evident in
these individuals’ unreasonable expectation of especially favorable treatment (Criterion 5). They
expect to be catered to and are puzzled or furious when this does not happen. For example, they
may assume that they do not have to wait in line and that their priorities are so important that
others should defer to them, and then get irritated when others fail to assist “in their very
important work.” They expect to be given whatever they want or feel they need, no matter what
it might mean to others. For example, these individuals may expect great dedication from others
and may overwork them without regard for the impact on their lives. This sense of entitlement,
combined with a lack of understanding and sensitivity to the wants and needs of others, may
result in the conscious or unwitting exploitation of others (Criterion 6). They tend to form
friendships or romantic relationships only if the other person seems likely to advance their
purposes or otherwise enhance their self-esteem. They often usurp special privileges and extra
resources that they believe they deserve. Some individuals with narcissistic personality disorder
intentionally and purposefully take advantage of others emotionally, socially, intellectually, or
financially for their own purposes and gains.
Individuals with narcissistic personality disorder generally have a lack of empathy and are
unwilling to recognize or identify with the desires, subjective experiences, and feelings of others
(Criterion 7). They tend to have some degree of cognitive empathy
762
(understanding another person’s perspective on an intellectual level) but lack emotional
empathy (directly feeling the emotions that another person is feeling). These individuals may be
oblivious to the hurt their remarks may inflict (e.g., exuberantly telling a former lover that “I am
now in the relationship of a lifetime!”; boasting of health in front of someone who is sick). When
recognized, the needs, desires, or feelings of others are likely to be viewed disparagingly as signs
of weakness or vulnerability. Those who relate to individuals with narcissistic personality
disorder typically find an emotional coldness and lack of reciprocal interest.
These individuals are often envious of others or believe that others are envious of them
(Criterion 8). They may begrudge others their successes or possessions, feeling that they better
deserve those achievements, admiration, or privileges. They may harshly devalue the
contributions of others, particularly when those individuals have received acknowledgment or
praise for their accomplishments. Arrogant, haughty behaviors characterize these individuals;
they often display snobbish, disdainful, or patronizing attitudes (Criterion 9).
