Associated Features
Vulnerability in self-esteem makes individuals with narcissistic personality disorder very
sensitive to criticism or defeat. Although they may not show it outwardly, such experiences may
leave them feeling ashamed, humiliated, degraded, hollow, and empty. They may react with
disdain, rage, or defiant counterattack. However, such experiences can also lead to social
withdrawal or an appearance of humility that may mask and protect the grandiosity.
Interpersonal relations are typically impaired because of problems related to self-preoccupation,
entitlement, need for admiration, and relative disregard for the sensitivities of others.
Individuals with narcissistic personality disorder can be competent and high functioning with
professional and social success, while others can have various levels of functional impairment.
Professional capability combined with self-control, stoicism, and interpersonal distancing with
minimal self-disclosure can support sustained life engagement and even enable marriage and
social affiliations. Sometimes ambition and temporary confidence lead to high achievements, but
performance can be disrupted because of fluctuating self-confidence and intolerance of criticism
or defeat. Some individuals with narcissistic personality disorder have very low vocational
functioning, reflecting an unwillingness to take a risk in competitive or other situations in which
failure or defeat can be possible.
Low self-esteem with inferiority, vulnerability, and sustained feelings of shame, envy, and
humiliation accompanied by self-criticism and insecurity can make individuals with narcissistic
personality disorder susceptible to social withdrawal, emptiness, and depressed mood. High
perfectionist standards are often associated with significant fear of exposure to imperfection,
failure, and overwhelming emotions.
Prevalence
The estimated prevalence of narcissistic personality disorder based on a probability subsample
from Part II of the National Comorbidity Survey Replication was 0.0%.The prevalence of
narcissistic personality disorder in the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related
Conditions data was 6.2%. A review of five epidemiological studies (four in the United States)
found a median prevalence of 1.6%.
Development and Course
Narcissistic traits may be particularly common in adolescents but do not necessarily indicate that
the individual will develop narcissistic personality disorder in adulthood. Predominant
narcissistic traits or manifestations of the full disorder may first come to clinical attention or be
exacerbated in the context of unexpected or extremely challenging life
763
experiences or crises, such as bankruptcies, demotions or loss of work, or divorces. In addition,
individuals with narcissistic personality disorder may have specific difficulties adjusting to the
onset of physical and occupational limitations that are inherent in the aging process. However,
life experiences, such as new durable relationships, real successful achievements, and tolerable
disappointments and setbacks, can all be corrective and contribute to changes and improvements
in individuals with this disorder.
