Other personality disorders and personality traits.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Narcissistic traits may be elevated in sociocultural contexts that emphasize individualism and
personal autonomy over collectivistic goals. Compared with collectivistic contexts, in
individualistic contexts, narcissistic traits may warrant less clinical attention or less frequently
lead to social impairment.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Among adults age 18 and older diagnosed with narcissistic personality disorder, 50%–75% are
men. Gender differences in adults with this disorder include stronger reactivity in response to
stress and compromised empathic processing in men as opposed to self-focus and withdrawal in
women. Culturally based gender patterns and expectations may also contribute to gender
differences in narcissistic personality disorder traits and patterns.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
In the context of severe stress, and given the perfectionism often associated with narcissistic
personality disorder, exposure to imperfection, failure, and overwhelming emotions can evoke
suicidal ideation. Suicide attempts in individuals with narcissistic personality disorder tend to be
less impulsive and are characterized by higher lethality compared with suicide attempts by
individuals with other personality disorders.
Differential Diagnosis
Other personality disorders may be confused with
narcissistic personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore,
important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic
features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more
personality disorders in addition to narcissistic personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. The
most useful feature in discriminating narcissistic personality disorder from histrionic, antisocial,
and borderline personality disorders, in which the interactive styles are coquettish, callous, and
needy, respectively, is the grandiosity characteristic of narcissistic personality disorder. The
relative stability of self-image and self-control as well as the relative lack of self-destructiveness,
impulsivity, separation insecurity, and emotional hyperreactivity also help distinguish
narcissistic personality disorder from borderline personality disorder.
Excessive pride in achievements, a relative lack of emotional display, and ignorance of or
disdain for others’ sensitivities help distinguish narcissistic personality disorder from histrionic
personality disorder. Although individuals with borderline, histrionic, and narcissistic personality
disorders may require much attention, those with narcissistic personality disorder specifically
need that attention to be admiring. Individuals with antisocial and narcissistic personality
disorders share a tendency to be tough-minded, glib, superficial, exploitative, and unempathic.
However, narcissistic personality disorder does not necessarily include characteristics of
impulsive aggressivity and deceitfulness. In addition, individuals with antisocial personality
disorder may be more indifferent and less sensitive to others’ reactions or criticism, and
individuals with narcissistic personality disorder usually lack the history of conduct disorder in
childhood or criminal behavior in adulthood.
