Mania or hypomania.
Substance use disorders.
Persistent depressive disorder.
F60.6
764
In both narcissistic personality disorder and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, the
individual may profess a commitment to perfectionism and believe that others cannot do things
as well. However, while those with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder tend to be more
immersed in perfectionism related to order and rigidity, individuals with narcissistic personality
disorder tend to set high perfectionistic standards, especially for appearance and performance,
and to be critically concerned if they are not measuring up.
Suspiciousness and social withdrawal usually distinguish those with schizotypal, avoidant, or
paranoid personality disorder from those with narcissistic personality disorder. When these
qualities are present in individuals with narcissistic personality disorder, they derive primarily
from shame and fear of failure, or fear of having imperfections or flaws revealed.
Many highly successful individuals display personality traits that might be considered
narcissistic. Only when these traits are inflexible, maladaptive, and persisting and cause
significant functional impairment or subjective distress do they constitute narcissistic personality
disorder.
Grandiosity may emerge as part of manic or hypomanic episodes, but the
association with mood change or functional impairments helps distinguish these episodes from
narcissistic personality disorder.
Narcissistic personality disorder must also be distinguished from
symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use.
Experiences that threaten self-esteem can evoke a deep sense of
inferiority and sustained feelings of shame, envy, self-criticism, and insecurity in individuals
with narcissistic personality disorder that can result in persistent negative feelings resembling
those seen in persistent depressive disorder. If criteria are also met for persistent depressive
disorder, both conditions can be diagnosed.
Comorbidity
Narcissistic personality disorder is associated with depressive disorders (persistent depressive
disorder and major depressive disorder), anorexia nervosa, and substance use disorders
(especially related to cocaine). Histrionic, borderline, antisocial, and paranoid personality
disorders may also be associated with narcissistic personality disorder.
Cluster C Personality Disorders
Avoidant Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A pervasive pattern of social inhibition, feelings of inadequacy, and hypersensitivity
