to negative evaluation, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of
contexts, as indicated by four (or more) of the following:
1. Avoids occupational activities that involve significant interpersonal contact
because of fears of criticism, disapproval, or rejection.
2. Is unwilling to get involved with people unless certain of being liked.
765
3. Shows restraint within intimate relationships because of the fear of being shamed
or ridiculed.
4. Is preoccupied with being criticized or rejected in social situations.
5. Is inhibited in new interpersonal situations because of feelings of inadequacy.
6. Views self as socially inept, personally unappealing, or inferior to others.
7. Is unusually reluctant to take personal risks or to engage in any new activities
because they may prove embarrassing.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of avoidant personality disorder is a pervasive pattern of social inhibition,
feelings of inadequacy, and hypersensitivity to negative evaluation that begins by early
adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with avoidant personality disorder avoid work activities that involve significant
interpersonal contact because of fears of criticism, disapproval, or rejection (Criterion 1). Offers
of job promotions may be declined because failure to manage the new responsibilities might
result in criticism from coworkers. These individuals avoid making new friends unless they are
certain they will be liked and accepted without criticism (Criterion 2). Until they pass stringent
tests proving the contrary, other people are assumed to be critical and disapproving. Individuals
with this disorder are highly avoidant of group activities. Interpersonal intimacy is often difficult
for these individuals, although they are able to establish intimate relationships when there is
assurance of uncritical acceptance. They may act with restraint, be reluctant to talk about
themselves, and withhold intimate feelings for fear of being exposed, ridiculed, or shamed
(Criterion 3).
Because individuals with this disorder are preoccupied with being criticized or rejected in
social situations, they may have a markedly low threshold for detecting such reactions (Criterion
4). If someone is even slightly disapproving or critical, they may feel extremely hurt. They tend
to be shy, quiet, inhibited, and “invisible” because of the fear that any attention would be critical
or rejecting. They expect that no matter what they say, others will see it as “wrong,” and so they
may say nothing at all. They react strongly to subtle cues that are suggestive of mockery or
derision, and may misinterpret a neutral gesture or statement as critical or rejecting. Despite their
longing to be active participants in social life, they fear placing their psychological welfare in the
hands of others. Individuals with avoidant personality disorder are inhibited in new interpersonal
situations because they feel inadequate and have low self-esteem (Criterion 5). These individuals
believe themselves to be socially inept, personally unappealing, or inferior to others (Criterion
6). Doubts concerning social competence and personal appeal may be most intense for some
individuals in settings involving interactions with strangers. But many others report more
