difficulties with repeated interaction, when sharing of personal information would normally
occur, thus, in the individual’s perception, increasing the chances that their inferiority would be
revealed and that they would be rejected. When commencing a new ongoing social or
occupational commitment requiring repeated interpersonal interaction, individuals may over
weeks or months develop a growing conviction that others or colleagues view them as inferior or
lacking worth, resulting in intolerable distress or anxiety that prompts resignation. Thus, a
history of repeated job changes may be present. Individuals with this disorder are unusually
reluctant to take personal risks or to engage in any new activities because these may prove
embarrassing (Criterion 7). They are prone to exaggerate the potential dangers of ordinary
situations, and a restricted lifestyle may result from their need for certainty and security.
Associated Features
Individuals with avoidant personality disorder often vigilantly appraise the movements and
expressions of those with whom they come into contact. They are likely to
766
misinterpret social responses as critical, which in turn confirms their self-doubts. They are
described by others as being “shy,” “timid,” “lonely,” and “isolated.” The major problems
associated with this disorder occur in social and occupational functioning. The low self-esteem
and hypersensitivity to rejection are associated with restricted interpersonal contacts. These
individuals may become relatively isolated and usually do not have a large social support
network that can help them weather crises. They desire affection and acceptance and may
fantasize about idealized relationships with others. Avoidant behaviors can also adversely affect
occupational functioning because these individuals try to avoid the types of social situations that
may be important for meeting the basic demands of the job or for advancement.
Individuals with avoidant personality disorder have been reported as having insecure
attachment styles characterized by a desire for emotional attachment (which may include a
preoccupation with previous and current relationships), but their fears that others may not value
them or may hurt them may lead them to respond with passivity, anger, or fear. These attachment
patterns have been referred to variously as “preoccupied” or “fearful” depending on the model
employed by researchers.
Prevalence
The estimated prevalence of avoidant personality disorder based on a probability subsample from
Part II of the National Comorbidity Survey Replication was 5.2%. The prevalence of avoidant
personality disorder in the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions
was 2.4%. A review of six epidemiological studies (four in the United States) found a median
prevalence of 2.1%.
Development and Course
The avoidant behavior often starts in infancy or childhood with shyness, isolation, and fear of
strangers and new situations. Although shyness in childhood is a common precursor of avoidant
personality disorder, in most individuals it tends to gradually dissipate as they get older. In
