groupings of disorders, as well as for “validating” proposed changes to diagnostic criteria.
As the APA and WHO began to plan their respective revisions of DSM and the International
Classification of Diseases (ICD), both considered the possibility of improving clinical utility
(e.g., by helping to explain apparent comorbidity) and facilitating scientific investigation by
rethinking the organizational structures of both publications. It was critical to both the DSM-5
Task Force and the WHO International Advisory Group on the revision of the ICD-10 Section on
Mental and Behavioral Disorders that the revisions to organization enhance clinical utility and
remain within the bounds of well-replicated
12
scientific information. In that spirit, revision of the organizational structure was approached
as a conservative, evolutionary diagnostic reform that would be guided by emerging scientific
evidence on the relationships between disorder groups. By reordering and regrouping the
existing disorders, the revised structure is meant to stimulate new clinical perspectives and to
encourage researchers to identify the psychological and physiological cross-cutting factors that
are not bound by strict categorical designations.
Early in the course of the revisions, it became apparent that a shared organizational structure
would help harmonize the classifications. To the surprise of participants in both revision
processes, large sections of the content fell relatively easily into place, reflecting real strengths in
some areas of the scientific literature, such as epidemiology, analyses of comorbidity, twin
studies, and certain other genetically informed designs. When disparities emerged, they almost
always reflected the need to make a judgment about where to place a disorder in the face of
incomplete—or, more often, conflicting—data. Thus, for example, on the basis of patterns of
symptoms, comorbidity, and shared risk factors, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
was placed within the DSM-5 chapter “Neurodevelopmental Disorders,” although the same data
also supported strong arguments to place ADHD within the chapter “Disruptive, Impulse-
Control, and Conduct Disorders.” These issues were settled with the preponderance of evidence
supporting placement in the “Neurodevelopmental Disorders” chapter in DSM-5.
The organization of chapters of DSM-5 after the neurodevelopmental disorders is based on
groups of internalizing disorders (i.e., disorders with prominent anxiety, depressive, and somatic
symptoms), externalizing disorders (i.e., disorders with prominent impulsive, disruptive conduct,
and substance use symptoms), neurocognitive disorders, and other disorders. It is hoped that this
organization will encourage further study of underlying pathophysiological processes that give
rise to diagnostic comorbidity and symptom heterogeneity. Furthermore, by arranging disorder
clusters to mirror clinical reality, DSM-5 should facilitate identification of potential diagnoses by
non–mental health specialists, such as primary care physicians.
Despite the problem posed by categorical diagnoses, the DSM-5 Task Force recognized that
it would have been premature scientifically to propose alternative dimensional definitions for
most disorders. The organizational structure is meant to serve as a bridge to new diagnostic
approaches without disrupting current clinical practice or research. It is anticipated that the more
dimensional DSM-5 approach and organizational structure will facilitate research across current
diagnostic categories by encouraging broad investigations within the proposed chapters and
across adjacent chapters. Such research should also keep DSM-5 central to the development of
dimensional approaches to diagnosis that will likely supplement or supersede current categorical
