Social anxiety disorder.
Agoraphobia.
Other personality disorders and personality traits.
contrast, individuals who go on to develop avoidant personality disorder may become
increasingly shy and avoidant during adolescence and early adulthood, when social relationships
with new people become especially important. There is some evidence that in adults, avoidant
personality disorder tends to become less evident or to remit with age; the prevalence in adults
older than 65 years has been estimated at 0.8%. This diagnosis should be used with great caution
in children and adolescents, for whom shy and avoidant behavior may be developmentally
appropriate.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
There may be variation in the degree to which different cultural and ethnic groups regard
diffidence and avoidance as appropriate. Moreover, avoidant behavior may be the result of
problems in acculturation following migration. In some sociocultural contexts, marked avoidance
might occur following social embarrassment (“loss of face”) or failure to meet major life goals
rather than temperamental shyness. In these settings, the goal of avoidance includes deliberate
minimization of social interactions in order to preserve social harmony or prevent public offense.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Avoidant personality disorder appears to be more common in women than in men in community
surveys. This gender difference in prevalence is small but consistently found in large population-
based samples.
767
Differential Diagnosis
There appears to be a great deal of overlap between avoidant personality
disorder and social anxiety disorder. It has been suggested that they may represent different
manifestations of similar underlying problems, or avoidant personality disorder may be a more
severe form of social anxiety disorder. However, differences have also been described, especially
in relation to self-concept (such as self-esteem and the sense of inferiority in avoidant personality
disorder); the latter is indirect evidence as it shows that negative self-concept in social anxiety
disorder may be unstable and thus less pervasive and entrenched than in avoidant personality
disorder. Additionally, studies have shown that avoidant personality disorder frequently occurs
in the absence of social anxiety disorder, and some separate risk factors have been identified,
providing support for retaining two separate diagnostic categories.
Avoidance characterizes both avoidant personality disorder and agoraphobia, and
they often co-occur. They can be distinguished by the motivation for the avoidance (e.g., fear of
panic or physical harm in agoraphobia).
Other personality disorders may be confused with
avoidant personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore,
important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic
features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more
personality disorders in addition to avoidant personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Both
avoidant personality disorder and dependent personality disorder are characterized by feelings of
