Personality change due to another medical condition.
Substance use disorders.
F60.7
inadequacy, hypersensitivity to criticism, and a need for reassurance. Similar behaviors (e.g.,
unassertiveness) and attributes (e.g., low self-esteem and low self-confidence) may be observed
in both dependent personality disorder and avoidant personality disorder, although other
behaviors are notably divergent, such as avoidance of social proximity in avoidant personality
disorder but proximity-seeking in dependent personality disorder. The motivations behind
similar behaviors may be quite different. For example, the unassertiveness in avoidant
personality disorder is described as more closely related to fears of being rejected or humiliated,
whereas in dependent personality disorder it is motivated by the desire to avoid being left to fend
for oneself. However, avoidant personality disorder and dependent personality disorder may be
particularly likely to co-occur. Like avoidant personality disorder, schizoid personality disorder
and schizotypal personality disorder are characterized by social isolation. However, individuals
with avoidant personality disorder want to have relationships with others and feel their loneliness
deeply, whereas those with schizoid or schizotypal personality disorder may be content with and
even prefer their social isolation. Paranoid personality disorder and avoidant personality disorder
are both characterized by a reluctance to confide in others. However, in avoidant personality
disorder, this reluctance is attributable more to a fear of humiliation or being found inadequate
than to a fear of others’ malicious intent.
Many individuals display avoidant personality traits. Only when these traits are inflexible,
maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or subjective distress do
they constitute avoidant personality disorder.
Avoidant 
personality 
disorder 
must 
be
distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in which the traits that
emerge are a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
Avoidant personality disorder must also be distinguished from
symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use.
768
Comorbidity
Other disorders that are commonly diagnosed with avoidant personality disorder include
depressive disorders and anxiety disorders, especially social anxiety disorder. Avoidant
personality disorder also tends to be diagnosed with schizoid personality disorder. Avoidant
personality disorder is associated with increased rates of substance use disorders at a similar rate
to the generalized form of social anxiety disorder.
Dependent Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A pervasive and excessive need to be taken care of that leads to submissive and
clinging behavior and fears of separation, beginning by early adulthood and present
in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following:
