1. Has difficulty making everyday decisions without an excessive amount of advice
and reassurance from others.
2. Needs others to assume responsibility for most major areas of his or her life.
3. Has difficulty expressing disagreement with others because of fear of loss of
support or approval. (Note: Do not include realistic fears of retribution.)
4. Has difficulty initiating projects or doing things on his or her own (because of a
lack of self-confidence in judgment or abilities rather than a lack of motivation or
energy).
5. Goes to excessive lengths to obtain nurturance and support from others, to the
point of volunteering to do things that are unpleasant.
6. Feels uncomfortable or helpless when alone because of exaggerated fears of
being unable to care for himself or herself.
7. Urgently seeks another relationship as a source of care and support when a
close relationship ends.
8. Is unrealistically preoccupied with fears of being left to take care of himself or
herself.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of dependent personality disorder is a pervasive and excessive need to be
taken care of that leads to submissive and clinging behavior and fears of separation. This pattern
begins by early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts. The dependent and submissive
behaviors are designed to elicit caregiving and arise from a self-perception of being unable to
function adequately without the help of others.
Individuals with dependent personality disorder have great difficulty making everyday
decisions (e.g., what color shirt to wear to work or whether to carry an umbrella) without an
excessive amount of advice and reassurance from others (Criterion 1). These individuals tend to
be passive and to allow other people (often a single other person) to take the initiative and
assume responsibility for most major areas of their lives (Criterion 2). Adults with this disorder
typically depend on a parent or spouse to decide where they should live, what kind of job they
should have, and which neighbors to befriend. Adolescents with this disorder may allow their
parent(s) to decide what they should wear, with whom they should associate, how they should
spend their free time, and what school or college they should attend. This need for others to
assume responsibility goes beyond age-appropriate and situation-appropriate requests for
assistance from others (e.g., the specific needs of children, elderly persons, and handicapped
persons). Dependent personality disorder may occur in an individual who has a serious medical
condition or disability, but in such cases the difficulty in taking responsibility must go beyond
what would normally be associated with that condition or disability.
769
Because they fear losing support or approval, individuals with dependent personality disorder
often have difficulty expressing disagreement with other individuals, especially those on whom
they are dependent (Criterion 3). These individuals feel so unable to function alone that they will
agree with things that they feel are wrong rather than risk losing the help of those to whom they
