look for guidance. They do not express anger toward others whose support and nurturance they
need for fear of alienating them. If the individual’s concerns regarding the consequences of
expressing disagreement are realistic (e.g., realistic fears of retribution from an abusive spouse),
the behavior should not be considered to be evidence of dependent personality disorder.
Individuals with this disorder have difficulty initiating projects or doing things independently
(Criterion 4). They lack self-confidence and believe that they need help to begin and carry
through tasks. They will wait for others to start things because they believe that as a rule others
can do them better. These individuals are convinced that they are incapable of functioning
independently and present themselves as inept and requiring constant assistance. They are,
however, likely to function adequately if given the assurance that someone else is supervising
and approving. There may be a fear of becoming or appearing to be more competent, because
they may believe that this will lead to loss of support. Because they rely on others to handle their
problems, they often do not learn the skills of independent living, thus perpetuating dependency.
Individuals with dependent personality disorder may go to excessive lengths to obtain
nurturance and support from others, even to the point of volunteering for unpleasant tasks if such
behavior will bring the care they need (Criterion 5). They are willing to submit to what others
want, even if the demands are unreasonable. Their need to maintain an important bond will often
result in imbalanced or distorted relationships. They may make extraordinary self-sacrifices or
tolerate verbal, physical, or sexual abuse. (It should be noted that this behavior should be
considered evidence of dependent personality disorder only when it can clearly be established
that other options are available to the individual.) Individuals with this disorder feel
uncomfortable or helpless when alone because of their exaggerated fears of being unable to care
for themselves (Criterion 6).
When a close relationship ends (e.g., a breakup with a lover; the death of a caregiver),
individuals with dependent personality disorder may urgently seek another relationship to
provide the care and support they need (Criterion 7). Their belief that they are unable to function
in the absence of a close relationship motivates these individuals to become quickly and
indiscriminately attached to another individual. Individuals with this disorder are often
preoccupied with fears of being left to care for themselves (Criterion 8). They see themselves as
so totally dependent on the advice and help of an important other person that they worry about
losing the support of that person when there are no grounds to justify such fears. To be
considered as evidence of this criterion, the fears must be excessive and unrealistic. For example,
an elderly man with cancer who moves into his son’s household for care is exhibiting dependent
behavior that is appropriate given this person’s life circumstances.
Associated Features
Individuals with dependent personality disorder are often characterized by pessimism and self-
doubt and tend to belittle their abilities and assets. They take criticism and disapproval as proof
of their worthlessness and lose faith in themselves. They may seek overprotection and
dominance from others. Occupational functioning may be impaired if independent initiative is
required. They may avoid positions of responsibility and become anxious when faced with
decisions.
Prevalence
