Separation anxiety disorder in adults.
Other mental disorders and medical conditions.
Other personality disorders and personality traits.
The estimated prevalence of dependent personality disorder based on a probability subsample
from Part II of the National Comorbidity Survey Replication was 0.6%. The
770
prevalence of dependent personality disorder in the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol
and Related Conditions was 0.5%. A review of six epidemiological studies (four in the United
States) found a median prevalence of 0.4%.
Development and Course
This diagnosis should be used with great caution, if at all, in children and adolescents, for whom
dependent behavior may be developmentally appropriate.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The degree to which dependent behaviors are considered to be appropriate varies substantially
across different age and sociocultural groups. Age and cultural factors need to be considered in
evaluating the diagnostic threshold of each criterion. Dependent behavior should be considered
characteristic of the disorder only when it is clearly in excess of the individual’s cultural norms
or reflects unrealistic concerns. An emphasis on passivity, politeness, and deferential treatment is
characteristic of some societies and may be misinterpreted as traits of dependent personality
disorder. Similarly, societies may differentially foster and discourage dependent behavior in
males and females. Individuals with dependent personality disorder exhibit a pervasive inability
to make decisions, continuous feelings of subjugation, lack of initiative, silence, and social
distancing that are far in excess of usual cultural norms of politeness and purposeful passivity.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
In clinical and community settings, dependent personality disorder has been diagnosed more
frequently in women compared with men.
Differential Diagnosis
Adults with separation anxiety disorder are typically
overconcerned about their offspring, spouses, parents, and pets, and experience marked
discomfort when separated from them. In contrast, individuals with dependent personality
disorder feel uncomfortable or helpless when alone because of exaggerated fears of being unable
to take care of themselves.
Dependent 
personality 
disorder 
must 
be
distinguished from dependency arising as a consequence of other mental disorders (e.g.,
depressive disorders, panic disorder, agoraphobia) and as a result of other medical conditions.
Other personality disorders may be confused with
dependent personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is therefore
important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic
features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more
personality disorders in addition to dependent personality disorder, all can be diagnosed.
