Personality change due to another medical condition.
Substance use disorders.
Although many personality disorders are characterized by dependent features, dependent
personality disorder can be distinguished by its predominantly submissive and clinging behavior
and by the person’s self-perception of not being able to function adequately without the help and
support of others. Both dependent personality disorder and borderline personality disorder are
characterized by fear of abandonment; however, the individual with borderline personality
disorder reacts to abandonment with feelings of emotional emptiness, rage, and demands,
whereas the individual with dependent personality disorder reacts with increasing appeasement
and submissiveness and urgently seeks a replacement relationship to provide caregiving and
support. Borderline personality disorder can further be distinguished from dependent
771
personality disorder by a typical pattern of unstable and intense relationships. Individuals with
histrionic personality disorder, like those with dependent personality disorder, have a strong need
for reassurance and approval and may appear childlike and clinging. However, unlike dependent
personality disorder, which is characterized by self-effacing and docile behavior, histrionic
personality disorder is characterized by gregarious flamboyance with active demands for
attention. Moreover, individuals with histrionic personality disorder typically have less insight
regarding their underlying dependency needs than do people with dependent personality
disorder. Both dependent personality disorder and avoidant personality disorder are characterized
by feelings of inadequacy, hypersensitivity to criticism, and a need for reassurance; however,
individuals with avoidant personality disorder have such a strong fear of humiliation and
rejection that they withdraw until they are certain they will be accepted. In contrast, individuals
with dependent personality disorder have a pattern of seeking and maintaining connections to
important others, rather than avoiding and withdrawing from relationships.
Many individuals display dependent personality traits. Only when these traits are inflexible,
maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or subjective distress do
they constitute dependent personality disorder.
Dependent 
personality 
disorder 
must 
be
distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in which the traits that
emerge are a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
Dependent personality disorder must also be distinguished from
symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use.
Comorbidity
There may be an increased risk of depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, and adjustment
disorders. Dependent personality disorder often co-occurs with other personality disorders,
especially borderline, avoidant, and histrionic personality disorders. Chronic physical illness or
persistent separation anxiety disorder in childhood or adolescence may predispose the individual
to the development of this disorder.
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
