F60.5
Diagnostic Criteria
A pervasive pattern of preoccupation with orderliness, perfectionism, and mental and
interpersonal control, at the expense of flexibility, openness, and efficiency,
beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by
four (or more) of the following:
1. Is preoccupied with details, rules, lists, order, organization, or schedules to the
extent that the major point of the activity is lost.
2. Shows perfectionism that interferes with task completion (e.g., is unable to
complete a project because his or her own overly strict standards are not met).
3. Is excessively devoted to work and productivity to the exclusion of leisure
activities and friendships (not accounted for by obvious economic necessity).
4. Is overconscientious, scrupulous, and inflexible about matters of morality, ethics,
or values (not accounted for by cultural or religious identification).
772
5. Is unable to discard worn-out or worthless objects even when they have no
sentimental value.
6. Is reluctant to delegate tasks or to work with others unless they submit to exactly
his or her way of doing things.
7. Adopts a miserly spending style toward both self and others; money is viewed as
something to be hoarded for future catastrophes.
8. Shows rigidity and stubbornness.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder is a preoccupation with
orderliness, perfectionism, and mental and interpersonal control, at the expense of flexibility,
openness, and efficiency. This pattern begins by early adulthood and is present in a variety of
contexts.
Individuals with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder attempt to maintain a sense of
control through painstaking attention to rules, trivial details, procedures, lists, schedules, or form
to the extent that the major point of the activity is lost (Criterion 1). They are excessively careful
and prone to repetition, paying extraordinary attention to detail and repeatedly checking for
possible mistakes, losing track of time in the process. For example, when such individuals
misplace a list of things to be done, they will spend an inordinate amount of time looking for the
list rather than spending a few moments trying their best to recreate it from memory and
proceeding to accomplish the tasks. They dismiss the fact that other people tend to become very
annoyed at the delays and inconveniences that result from this behavior because they
preferentially respond to either their anxiety about making a mistake or their insistence on how
things should be done. Time is poorly allocated, and the most important tasks are left to the last
moment. The perfectionism and self-imposed high standards of performance cause significant
dysfunction and distress in these individuals. They may become so involved in making every
