detail of a project absolutely perfect that the project is never finished (Criterion 2). For example,
the completion of a written report is delayed by numerous time-consuming rewrites that all come
up short of “perfection.” Deadlines are routinely missed or the individual has a pattern of
exerting extraordinary effort (e.g., working through the night, skipping meals) in order to make
the deadline at the last moment, and aspects of the individual’s life that are not the current focus
of activity may fall into disarray.
Individuals with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder display excessive devotion to
work and productivity to the exclusion or devaluing of leisure activities and friendships
(Criterion 3). This behavior is not accounted for by economic necessity. They often feel that they
do not have time to take an evening or a weekend day off to go on an outing or to just relax.
They may keep postponing a pleasurable activity, such as a vacation, so that it may never occur.
When they reluctantly take time for leisure activities or vacations, they are very uncomfortable
unless they have taken along something to work on so they do not “waste time.” There may be a
great concentration on household chores (e.g., repeated excessive cleaning so that “one could eat
off the floor”). If they spend time with friends, it is likely to be in some kind of formally
organized activity (e.g., sports). Hobbies or recreational activities are approached as serious tasks
or with methodical intensity, requiring careful organization and hard work to master. The
emphasis is on perfect performance. These individuals turn play into a structured work-like task
(e.g., correcting an infant for not putting rings on the post in the right order; telling a toddler to
ride their tricycle in a straight line; turning a baseball game into a harsh “lesson”).
Individuals 
with 
obsessive-compulsive 
personality 
disorder 
may 
be 
excessively
conscientious, scrupulous, and inflexible about matters of morality, ethics, or values (Criterion
4). They may force themselves and others to follow rigid moral principles and very strict
standards of performance. They may also be mercilessly self-critical about their own
773
mistakes or harshly judgmental of others’ moral or ethical missteps. Individuals with this
disorder are rigidly deferential to authority and rules and insist on quite literal compliance, with
no rule bending for extenuating circumstances. For example, the individual will not lend a dollar
to a friend who is short of the fare needed to get on a bus because “neither a borrower nor a
lender be” or because it would be “bad” for the friend’s character. These qualities should not be
accounted for by the individual’s cultural or religious identification.
Individuals with this disorder may be unable to discard worn-out or worthless objects, even
when they have no sentimental value (Criterion 5). Often these individuals will admit to being
“pack rats.” They regard discarding objects as wasteful because “you never know when you
might need something.” The clutter may also result from an accumulation of partially read
learning material or unfinished projects that the individual intends to get to someday but that
have been sidelined because of procrastination and/or a meticulous yet slow work style. These
individuals will become upset if someone tries to get rid of the things they have saved. Their
spouses or roommates may complain about the amount of space taken up by old parts, piles of
reading material, broken appliances, and so on.
Individuals with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder are reluctant to delegate tasks or
to work with others (Criterion 6). They stubbornly and unreasonably insist that everything be
done their way and that people conform to their way of doing things. They often give very
