detailed instructions about how things should be done (e.g., there is one and only one way to
mow the lawn, wash the dishes, load the dishwasher, build a doghouse), even to the point of
micromanaging others, and are surprised and irritated if others suggest creative alternatives. At
other times they may reject offers of help even when behind schedule because they believe no
one else can do it right.
Individuals with this disorder may be miserly and stingy (having difficulty spending money
on both themselves and others) and maintain a standard of living far below what they can afford,
believing that spending must be tightly controlled to provide for future catastrophes (Criterion 7).
Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder is characterized by rigidity and stubbornness
(Criterion 8). Individuals with this disorder are so concerned about having things done the one
“correct” way that they have trouble going along with anyone else’s ideas. These individuals
plan ahead in meticulous detail and are unwilling to consider changes to these plans or their
usual routines. Totally wrapped up in their own perspective, they have difficulty acknowledging
the viewpoints of others. Friends and colleagues may become frustrated by this constant rigidity.
Even when individuals with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder recognize that it may be
in their interest to compromise, they may stubbornly refuse to do so, arguing that it is “the
principle of the thing.”
Associated Features
When rules and established procedures do not dictate the correct answer, decision-making may
become a time-consuming, often painful process (e.g., exhaustively researching options before
making a purchase). Individuals with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder may have such
difficulty deciding which tasks take priority or what is the best way of doing some particular task
that they may never get started on anything. They are prone to become upset or angry in
situations in which they are not able to maintain control of their physical or interpersonal
environment, although the anger is typically not expressed directly. For example, an individual
may be angry when service in a restaurant is poor, but instead of complaining to the
management, the individual ruminates about how much to leave as a tip. On other occasions,
anger may be expressed with righteous indignation over a seemingly minor matter. Individuals
with this disorder may be especially attentive to their relative status in dominance-submission
relationships and may display excessive deference to an authority they respect and excessive
resistance to authority they do not respect.
774
Individuals with this disorder have difficulty relating to and sharing emotions. For example,
they may express affection in a highly controlled or stilted fashion and may be very
uncomfortable in the presence of others who are emotionally expressive. Their everyday
relationships have a formal and serious quality, and they may be stiff in situations in which
others would smile and be happy (e.g., greeting a lover at the airport). They carefully hold
themselves back until they are sure that whatever they say will be perfect. They may be
preoccupied with logic and intellect and intolerant of displays of emotion in others. They often
have difficulty expressing tender feelings, rarely paying compliments. Individuals with this
disorder may experience occupational difficulties and distress, particularly when confronted with
