Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).
Hoarding disorder.
Other personality disorders and personality traits.
new situations that demand flexibility and compromise.
Prevalence
The estimated prevalence of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder based on a probability
subsample from Part II of the National Comorbidity Survey Replication was 2.4%. The
prevalence of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder in the National Epidemiologic Survey
on Alcohol and Related Conditions was 7.9%. A review of five epidemiological studies (three in
the United States) found a median prevalence of 4.7%.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
In assessing an individual for obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, the clinician should not
include those behaviors that reflect habits, customs, or interpersonal styles that are culturally
sanctioned by the individual’s reference group. Certain cultural communities place substantial
emphasis on work and productivity, and some members of sociocultural groups (e.g., certain
religious groups, professions, migrants) may at times rigidly embrace codes of conduct; work
demands; restrictive social environments; rules of behavior; or standards that emphasize
overconscientiousness, moral scrupulosity, and striving for perfectionism that may be reinforced
by norms of the cultural group. Such behaviors should not on their own be considered indications
of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
In large population-based studies, obsessive-compulsive personality disorder appears to be
equally prevalent in men and women.
Differential Diagnosis
Despite the similarity in names, OCD is usually easily
distinguished from obsessive-compulsive personality disorder by the presence of true obsessions
and compulsions in OCD. When criteria for both obsessive-compulsive personality disorder and
OCD are met, both diagnoses should be recorded.
A diagnosis of hoarding disorder should be considered especially when
hoarding is extreme (e.g., accumulated stacks of worthless objects present a fire hazard and make
it difficult for others to walk through the house). When criteria for both obsessive-compulsive
personality disorder and hoarding disorder are met, both diagnoses should be recorded.
Other personality disorders may be confused with
obsessive-compulsive personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is,
therefore, important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their
characteristic features. However, if an individual has personality
775
features that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders in addition to obsessive-
compulsive personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Individuals with narcissistic personality
disorder may also profess a commitment to perfectionism and believe that others cannot do
