approaches in coming years.
Combining Developmental and Life Span Considerations
To improve clinical utility, DSM-5 is organized along developmental and life span trajectories. It
begins with diagnoses thought to reflect developmental processes that manifest early in life (e.g.,
neurodevelopmental disorders and schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders),
followed by diagnoses that more commonly manifest in adolescence and young adulthood (e.g.,
bipolar and related disorders, depressive disorders, and anxiety disorders), and ends with
diagnoses relevant to adulthood and later life (e.g., neurocognitive disorders). A similar approach
has been taken, where possible, within each chapter. This organizational structure facilitates the
comprehensive use of life span information as a way to assist in diagnostic decision-making.
13
Harmonization With ICD-11
The groups tasked with revising the DSM and ICD systems shared the overarching goal of
harmonizing the two classifications as much as possible, for the following reasons:
The existence of two major classifications of mental disorders hinders the collection and use of national health statistics, the
design of clinical trials aimed at developing new treatments, and the consideration of global applicability of the results by
international regulatory agencies.
More broadly, the existence of two classifications complicates attempts to replicate scientific results across national
boundaries.
Even when the intention was to identify identical patient populations, DSM-IV and ICD-10 diagnoses did not always agree.
As discussed earlier in this introduction, the effort to harmonize with ICD-11 was confined to
the largely successful harmonization of the organizational structure. Because of differences in
timing, complete harmonization of the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria with the ICD-11 disorder
definitions was not possible because the DSM-5 developmental effort was several years ahead of
the ICD-11 revision process. Consequently, the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria were finalized just as
the ICD-11 working groups were beginning to develop the ICD-11 clinical descriptions and
diagnostic guidelines. Some improvement in harmonization at the disorder level was still
achieved; many ICD-11 working group members had participated in the development of the
DSM-5 diagnostic criteria, and the ICD-11 working groups were instructed to review the DSM-5
criteria sets and to strive to make ICD-11 diagnostic guidelines as similar to DSM-5 as possible
unless there was a considered reason for them to differ. A review comparing DSM-5/ICD-11
differences with DSM-IV/ICD-10 differences found that ICD and DSM are now closer than at
any time since DSM-II and ICD-8 and that current differences are based largely on differing
priorities and uses of the two diagnostic systems and on differing interpretations of the evidence.
Although ICD-11 was officially endorsed for use by WHO member nations during the 72nd
World Health Assembly in May 2019 and officially came into effect on January 1, 2022, each
country chooses when to adopt ICD-11. There is currently no proposed timeline for
implementation of ICD-11 in the United States. Consequently, for the foreseeable future the
