Personality change due to another medical condition.
Substance use disorders.
F07.0
things as well, but these individuals are more likely to believe that they have achieved perfection,
whereas those with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder are usually self-critical.
Individuals with narcissistic or antisocial personality disorder lack generosity but will indulge
themselves, whereas those with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder adopt a miserly
spending style toward both self and others. Both schizoid personality disorder and obsessive-
compulsive personality disorder may be characterized by an apparent formality and social
detachment. In obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, this stems from discomfort with
emotions and excessive devotion to work, whereas in schizoid personality disorder there is a
fundamental lack of capacity for intimacy.
Obsessive-compulsive personality traits in moderation may be especially adaptive,
particularly in situations that reward high performance. Only when these traits are inflexible,
maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or subjective distress do
they constitute obsessive-compulsive personality disorder.
Obsessive-compulsive 
personality 
disorder
must be distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in which the
traits are a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder must also be distinguished
from symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use.
Comorbidity
Individuals with anxiety disorders (e.g., generalized anxiety disorder, separation anxiety
disorder, social anxiety disorder, specific phobias) and OCD have an increased likelihood of
having a personality disturbance that meets criteria for obsessive-compulsive personality
disorder. Even so, it appears that the majority of individuals with OCD do not have a pattern of
behavior that meets criteria for this personality disorder. Many of the features of obsessive-
compulsive personality disorder overlap with “type A” personality characteristics (e.g.,
preoccupation with work, competitiveness, time urgency), and these features may be present in
individuals at risk for myocardial infarction. There may be an association between obsessive-
compulsive personality disorder and depressive and bipolar disorders and eating disorders.
Other Personality Disorders
Personality Change Due to Another Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A persistent personality disturbance that represents a change from the
individual’s previous characteristic personality pattern.
Note: In children, the disturbance involves a marked deviation from normal
development or a significant change in the child’s usual behavior patterns, lasting
