at least 1 year.
776
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another
medical condition.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (including
another mental disorder due to another medical condition).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify whether:
Labile type: If the predominant feature is affective lability.
Disinhibited type: If the predominant feature is poor impulse control as
evidenced by sexual indiscretions, etc.
Aggressive type: If the predominant feature is aggressive behavior.
Apathetic type: If the predominant feature is marked apathy and indifference.
Paranoid type: If the predominant feature is suspiciousness or paranoid
ideation.
Other type: If the presentation is not characterized by any of the above
subtypes.
Combined type: If more than one feature predominates in the clinical picture.
Unspecified type
Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition (e.g., F07.0
personality change due to temporal lobe epilepsy). The other medical condition
should be coded and listed separately immediately before the personality change
due to another medical condition (e.g., G40.209 temporal lobe epilepsy; F07.0
personality change due to temporal lobe epilepsy).
Subtypes
The particular personality change can be specified by indicating the symptom presentation that
predominates in the clinical presentation.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of a personality change due to another medical condition is a persistent
personality disturbance that is judged to be a physiological consequence of another medical
condition. The personality disturbance represents a change from the individual’s previous
characteristic personality pattern. In children, this condition may be manifested as a marked
deviation from normal development rather than as a change in a stable personality pattern
(Criterion A). There must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
