Chronic medical conditions associated with pain and disability.
Delirium or major neurocognitive disorder.
findings that the personality change is the direct physiological consequence of another medical
condition (Criterion B). The diagnosis is not given if the disturbance is better explained by
another mental disorder (Criterion C). The diagnosis is not given if the disturbance occurs
exclusively during the course of a delirium (Criterion D). The disturbance must also cause
clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning (Criterion E).
Common manifestations of the personality change include affective instability, poor impulse
control, outbursts of aggression or rage grossly out of proportion to any precipitating
psychosocial stressor, marked apathy, suspiciousness, or paranoid ideation. The phenomenology
of the change is indicated using the subtypes listed in the criteria set. An individual with the
disorder is often characterized by others as “not himself [or herself].” Although it shares the term
“personality” with the other personality disorders, this diagnosis is distinct by virtue of its
specific etiology, different phenomenology, and more variable onset and course.
The clinical presentation in a given individual may depend on the nature and localization of
the pathological process. For example, injury to the frontal lobes may yield
777
symptoms such as lack of judgment or foresight, facetiousness, disinhibition, and euphoria.
In this example, the diagnosis of personality change due to frontal lobe injury would be made if a
persistent personality disturbance is a deviation from the individual’s previous characteristic
personality pattern prior to the injury (Criterion A). Right hemisphere strokes have often been
shown to evoke personality changes in association with unilateral spatial neglect, anosognosia
(i.e., inability of the individual to recognize a bodily or functional deficit, such as the existence
of hemiparesis), motor impersistence, and other neurological deficits.
Associated Features
A variety of neurological and other medical conditions may cause personality changes, including
central nervous system neoplasms, head trauma, cerebrovascular disease, Huntington’s disease,
epilepsy, infectious conditions with central nervous system involvement (e.g., HIV), endocrine
conditions (e.g., hypothyroidism, hypo- and hyperadrenocorticism), and autoimmune conditions
with central nervous system involvement (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus). The associated
physical examination findings, laboratory findings, and patterns of prevalence and onset reflect
those of the neurological or other medical condition involved.
Differential Diagnosis
Chronic medical conditions associated
with pain and disability can also be associated with changes in personality. The diagnosis of
personality change due to another medical condition is given only if a direct pathophysiological
mechanism can be established. This diagnosis is not given if the change is due to a behavioral or
psychological adjustment or response to another medical condition (e.g., dependent behaviors
that result from a need for the assistance of others following a severe head trauma,
cardiovascular disease, or dementia).
Personality change is a frequently associated feature of a
