Another mental disorder due to another medical condition.
Substance use disorders.
Other mental disorders.
Other personality disorders.
delirium or major neurocognitive disorder. A separate diagnosis of personality change due to
another medical condition is not given if the change occurs exclusively during the course of a
delirium. However, the diagnosis of personality change due to another medical condition may be
given in addition to the diagnosis of major neurocognitive disorder if the personality change is
judged to be a physiological consequence of the pathological process causing the neurocognitive
disorder and if the personality change is a prominent part of the clinical presentation.
The diagnosis of personality change due to
another medical condition is not given if the disturbance is better explained by another mental
disorder due to another medical condition (e.g., depressive disorder due to brain tumor).
Personality changes may also occur in the context of substance use
disorders, especially if the disorder is long-standing. The clinician should inquire carefully about
the nature and extent of substance use. If the clinician wishes to indicate an etiological
relationship between the personality change and substance use, the other specified category for
the specific substance can be used (e.g., other specified stimulant-related disorder with
personality change).
Marked personality changes may also be an associated feature of other
mental disorders (e.g., schizophrenia; delusional disorder; depressive and bipolar disorders; other
specified and unspecified disruptive behavior, impulse-control, and conduct disorders; panic
disorder). However, in these disorders, no specific physiological factor is judged to be
etiologically related to the personality change.
778
Personality change due to another medical condition can be
distinguished from a personality disorder by the requirement for a clinically significant change
from baseline personality functioning and the presence of a specific etiological medical
condition.
Other Specified Personality Disorder
F60.89
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a
personality disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet
the full criteria for any of the disorders in the personality disorders diagnostic class.
The other specified personality disorder category is used in situations in which the
clinician chooses to communicate the specific reason that the presentation does not
meet the criteria for any specific personality disorder. This is done by recording
“other specified personality disorder” followed by the specific reason (e.g., “mixed
personality features”).
