Paraphilic Disorders
Paraphilic disorders included in this manual are voyeuristic disorder (spying on others
in private activities), exhibitionistic disorder (exposing the genitals), frotteuristic disorder
(touching or rubbing against a nonconsenting person), sexual masochism disorder (undergoing
humiliation, bondage, or suffering), sexual sadism disorder (inflicting humiliation, bondage, or
suffering), pedophilic disorder (sexual focus on children), fetishistic disorder (using nonliving
objects or having a highly specific focus on nongenital body parts), and transvestic disorder
(engaging in sexually arousing cross-dressing). These disorders have traditionally been selected
for specific listing and assignment of explicit diagnostic criteria in DSM for two main reasons:
they are relatively common, in relation to other paraphilic disorders, and some of them entail
actions for their satisfaction that, because of their noxiousness or potential harm to others, are
classed as criminal offenses. The eight listed disorders do not exhaust the list of possible
paraphilic disorders. Many dozens of distinct paraphilias have been identified and named, and
almost any of them could, by virtue of its negative consequences for the individual or for others,
rise to the level of a paraphilic disorder.
In this chapter, the order of presentation of the listed paraphilic disorders generally
corresponds to common classification schemes for these conditions. The first group of disorders
is based on anomalous activity preferences. These disorders are subdivided into courtship
disorders, which resemble distorted components of human courtship behavior (voyeuristic
disorder, exhibitionistic disorder, and frotteuristic disorder), and algolagnic disorders, which
involve pain and suffering (sexual masochism disorder and sexual sadism disorder). The second
group of disorders is based on anomalous target preferences. These disorders include one
directed at other humans (pedophilic disorder) and two directed elsewhere (fetishistic disorder
and transvestic disorder).
The term paraphilia denotes any intense and persistent sexual interest other than sexual
interest in genital stimulation or preparatory fondling with phenotypically normal, physically
mature, consenting human partners. In some circumstances, the criteria “intense and persistent”
may be difficult to apply, such as in the assessment of persons who are very old or medically ill
and who may not have “intense” sexual interests of any kind. In such circumstances, the term
paraphilia may be defined as any sexual interest greater than or equal to nonparaphilic sexual
interests. There are also specific paraphilias that are generally better described as preferential
sexual interests than as intense sexual interests.
Some paraphilias primarily concern the individual’s erotic activities, and others primarily
concern the individual’s erotic targets. Examples of the former would include intense and
persistent interests in spanking, whipping, cutting, binding, or strangulating another person, or an
interest in these activities that equals or exceeds the individual’s interest in copulation or
equivalent interaction with another person. Examples of the latter would include intense or
preferential sexual interest in children, corpses, or amputees (as a class), as well as intense or
