F65.3
preferential interest in nonhuman animals, such as horses or dogs, or in inanimate objects, such
as shoes or articles made of rubber. An individual’s pattern of paraphilic interests is often
reflected in his or her choice of pornography.
780
A paraphilic disorder is a paraphilia that is currently causing distress or impairment to the
individual or a paraphilia whose satisfaction has entailed personal harm, or risk of harm, to
others. A paraphilia is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for having a paraphilic disorder,
and a paraphilia by itself does not necessarily justify or require clinical intervention.
In the diagnostic criteria set for each of the listed paraphilic disorders, Criterion A specifies
the qualitative nature of the paraphilia (e.g., an erotic focus on children or on exposing the
genitals to strangers), and Criterion B specifies the negative consequences of the paraphilia (i.e.,
distress, impairment, or harm to others). In keeping with the distinction between paraphilias and
paraphilic disorders, the term diagnosis should be reserved for individuals whose paraphilic
interests or behaviors meet both Criteria A and B (i.e., individuals who have a paraphilic
disorder). If an individual’s paraphilic interests or behaviors meet Criterion A but not Criterion B
for a particular paraphilia—a circumstance that might arise when a benign paraphilia is
discovered during the clinical investigation of some other condition—then the individual may be
said to have that paraphilia but not a paraphilic disorder.
It is not rare for an individual to manifest two or more paraphilias. In some cases, the
paraphilic foci are closely related and the connection between the paraphilias is intuitively
comprehensible (e.g., foot fetishism and shoe fetishism). In other cases, the connection between
the paraphilias is not obvious, and the presence of multiple paraphilias may be coincidental or
else related to some generalized vulnerability to anomalies of psychosexual development. In any
event, comorbid diagnoses of separate paraphilic disorders may be warranted if more than one
paraphilia is causing suffering to the individual or harm to others.
Because of the two-pronged nature of diagnosing paraphilic disorders, clinician-rated or self-
rated measures and severity assessments could address either the strength of the paraphilia itself
or the seriousness of its consequences. Although the distress and impairment stipulated in the
Criterion B are special in being the immediate or ultimate result of the paraphilia and not
primarily the result of some other factor, the phenomena of reactive depression, anxiety, guilt,
poor work history, impaired social relations, and so on are not unique in themselves and may be
quantified with multipurpose measures of psychosocial functioning or quality of life.
Voyeuristic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from
observing an unsuspecting person who is naked, in the process of disrobing, or
engaging in sexual activity, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.
B. The individual has acted on these sexual urges with a nonconsenting person, or
