the sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The individual experiencing the arousal and/or acting on the urges is at least 18
years of age.
Specify if:
In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals
living in institutional or other settings where opportunities to engage in
voyeuristic behavior are restricted.
In full remission: The individual has not acted on the urges with a
nonconsenting person, and there has been no distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other areas of functioning, for at least 5 years while in an
uncontrolled environment.
781
Specifiers
The “in full remission” specifier does not address the continued presence or absence of
voyeurism per se, which may still be present after behaviors and distress have remitted.
Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic criteria for voyeuristic disorder can apply both to individuals who more or less
freely disclose this paraphilic interest and to those who categorically deny any sexual arousal
from observing an unsuspecting person who is naked, disrobing, or engaged in sexual activity
despite substantial objective evidence to the contrary. If disclosing individuals also report
distress or psychosocial problems because of their voyeuristic sexual preferences, they could be
diagnosed with voyeuristic disorder. On the other hand, if they declare no distress, demonstrated
by lack of anxiety, obsessions, guilt, or shame, about these paraphilic impulses and are not
impaired in other important areas of functioning because of this sexual interest, and their
psychiatric or legal histories indicate that they do not act on it, they could be ascertained as
having voyeuristic sexual interest but should not be diagnosed with voyeuristic disorder.
Nondisclosing individuals include, for example, individuals known to have been spying
repeatedly on unsuspecting persons who are naked or engaging in sexual activity on separate
occasions but who deny any urges or fantasies concerning such sexual behavior, and who may
report that known episodes of watching unsuspecting naked or sexually active persons were all
accidental and nonsexual. Others may disclose past episodes of observing unsuspecting naked or
sexually active persons but contest any significant or sustained sexual interest in this behavior.
Since these individuals deny having fantasies or impulses about watching others nude or
involved in sexual activity, it follows that they would also reject feeling subjectively distressed
or socially impaired by such impulses. Despite their nondisclosing stance, such individuals may
be diagnosed with voyeuristic disorder. Recurrent voyeuristic behavior constitutes sufficient
support for voyeurism (by fulfilling Criterion A) and simultaneously demonstrates that this
paraphilically motivated behavior is causing harm to others (by fulfilling Criterion B).
“Recurrent” spying on unsuspecting persons who are naked or engaging in sexual activity
