Temperamental.
Environmental.
may be interpreted as requiring multiple victims, each on a separate occasion; this requirement
for multiple victims on separate occasions is relevant because it increases the confidence in the
clinical inference that the individual is motivated by voyeuristic disorder. Fewer victims can be
interpreted as satisfying this criterion if there were multiple occasions of watching the same
victim or if there is corroborating evidence of a distinct or preferential interest in secret watching
of naked or sexually active unsuspecting persons. Note that multiple victims, as suggested
earlier, are a sufficient but not a necessary condition for diagnosis; the criteria may also be met if
the individual acknowledges intense voyeuristic sexual interest.
Adolescence and puberty generally increase sexual curiosity and activity. To reduce the risk
of pathologizing normative sexual interest and behavior during pubertal adolescence, the
minimum age for the diagnosis of voyeuristic disorder is 18 years (Criterion C).
Prevalence
The population prevalence of individuals whose presentations meet the full criteria for
voyeuristic disorder is unknown. Voyeuristic acts, however, are the most common of potentially
law-breaking sexual behaviors. For example, in a Quebec Internet and phone survey sample, the
lifetime prevalence of voyeuristic behaviors was reported to be as high as 34.5% (50.3% in men,
21.2% in women). Because this same study found that an “intense desire” and “persistent
behavior” occur with much less frequency (9.6% and 2.1%, respectively), the prevalence of
voyeuristic disorder is likely much lower. The ratio of voyeuristic behavior in men to women
was approximately 2:1 in the Quebec sample and 3:1 in a Swedish general population sample. In
a study determining which particular disorders were prevalent
782
in individuals incarcerated for sexual offenses, a study of 1,346 incarcerated sex offenders from
Austria found a prevalence of voyeuristic disorder of 3.7%.
Development and Course
Adult men with voyeuristic disorder often first become aware of their sexual interest in secretly
watching unsuspecting persons during adolescence. However, the minimum age for a diagnosis
of voyeuristic disorder is 18 years because there is substantial difficulty in differentiating it from
age-appropriate puberty-related sexual curiosity and activity. The persistence of voyeurism over
time is unclear. With or without treatment of voyeuristic disorder, the subjective distress (e.g.,
guilt, shame, intense sexual frustration, loneliness) or impairment from the disorder may change
over time, as may a number of factors that may potentially affect the course of the disorder, such
as psychiatric morbidity, hypersexuality, and sexual impulsivity. Thus, the severity and course
may vary over time. As with other sexual preferences, advancing age may be associated with
decreasing voyeuristic sexual preferences and behavior.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Because voyeurism is a necessary precondition for voyeuristic disorder, risk
factors for voyeurism should also increase the risk of voyeuristic disorder.
Childhood 
sexual 
abuse, 
substance 
misuse, 
and 
sexual
