official coding system in the United States continues to be the International Classification of
Diseases, Tenth Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-10-CM).
Key Conceptual Frameworks and Approaches
Definition of a Mental Disorder
Each disorder identified in Section II of the manual (excluding those in the chapters
“Medication-Induced Movement Disorders and Other Adverse Effects of Medication” and
“Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention”) must meet the definition of a
mental disorder. Although no definition can capture all aspects of the range of disorders
contained in DSM-5, the following elements are required:
14
A mental disorder is a syndrome characterized by clinically significant
disturbance in an individual’s cognition, emotion regulation, or behavior that
reflects a dysfunction in the psychological, biological, or developmental
processes underlying mental functioning. Mental disorders are usually
associated with significant distress or disability in social, occupational, or
other important activities. An expectable or culturally approved response to a
common stressor or loss, such as the death of a loved one, is not a mental
disorder. Socially deviant behavior (e.g., political, religious, or sexual) and
conflicts that are primarily between the individual and society are not mental
disorders unless the deviance or conflict results from a dysfunction in the
individual, as described above.
The diagnosis of a mental disorder should have clinical utility: it should help clinicians to
determine prognosis, treatment plans, and potential treatment outcomes for their patients.
However, the diagnosis of a mental disorder is not equivalent to a need for treatment. Need for
treatment is a complex clinical decision that takes into consideration symptom severity, symptom
salience (e.g., the presence of suicidal thoughts), the individual’s distress (mental pain)
associated with the symptom(s), disability related to the individual’s symptoms, risks and
benefits of available treatments, and other factors (e.g., psychiatric symptoms complicating other
illness). Clinicians may thus encounter individuals whose symptoms do not meet full criteria for
a mental disorder but who demonstrate a clear need for treatment or care. The fact that some
individuals do not show all symptoms indicative of a diagnosis should not be used to justify
limiting their access to appropriate care.
It should be noted that the definition of mental disorder was developed for clinical, public
health, and research purposes. Additional information is usually required beyond that contained
in the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria in order to make legal judgments on such issues as criminal
responsibility, eligibility for disability compensation, and competency (see “Cautionary
Statement for Forensic Use of DSM-5” at the conclusion of Section I).
