Voyeurism.
Manic episode, major neurocognitive disorder, intellectual developmental disorder, personality
change due to another medical condition, substance intoxication, and schizophrenia.
Conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder.
F65.2
preoccupation/hypersexuality have been suggested as risk factors, although the causal
relationship to voyeuristic behavior is uncertain and the specificity unclear.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Voyeuristic disorder is very uncommon among women in clinical settings, whereas the ratio in
men to women for single sexually arousing voyeuristic acts is less extreme and may be 2:1–3:1.
Differential Diagnosis
Individuals with voyeurism experience recurrent, intense sexual arousal from the act
of observing an unsuspecting person who is naked, in the process of disrobing, or engaging in
sexual activity. Unless the individual acts on these urges with an unsuspecting person (e.g.,
surreptitiously peeping through a neighbor’s window) or unless there is accompanying clinically
significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning,
a diagnosis of voyeuristic disorder is not warranted.
Individuals with a major neurocognitive disorder, intellectual developmental disorder,
personality change due to another medical condition, or schizophrenia, or who are in a manic
episode or experiencing substance intoxication, may become sexually disinhibited or have
impaired judgment or impulse control and engage in voyeuristic behavior. Unless that behavior
occurs at times other than in the context of one of these disorders, a diagnosis of voyeuristic
disorder should not be made.
Conduct disorder in adolescents and antisocial
personality disorder would be characterized by additional norm-breaking and antisocial
behaviors, and the specific sexual interest in secretly watching unsuspecting others who are
naked or engaging in sexual activity will usually be lacking.
Comorbidity
Known comorbidities in voyeuristic disorder are largely based on research with males suspected
of or convicted for acts involving the secret watching of unsuspecting nude or
783
sexually active persons. Hence, these comorbidities might not apply to all individuals with
voyeuristic disorder. Conditions that occur comorbidly with voyeuristic disorder include
hypersexuality and other paraphilic disorders, particularly exhibitionistic disorder. Depressive,
bipolar, anxiety, and substance use disorders; attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; and
conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder are also frequent comorbid conditions.
Exhibitionistic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
