A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from the
exposure of one’s genitals to an unsuspecting person, as manifested by
fantasies, urges, or behaviors.
B. The individual has acted on these sexual urges with a nonconsenting person, or
the sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify whether:
Sexually aroused by exposing genitals to prepubertal children
Sexually aroused by exposing genitals to physically mature individuals
Sexually aroused by exposing genitals to prepubertal children and to
physically mature individuals
Specify if:
In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals
living in institutional or other settings where opportunities to expose one’s
genitals are restricted.
In full remission: The individual has not acted on the urges with a
nonconsenting person, and there has been no distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other areas of functioning, for at least 5 years while in an
uncontrolled environment.
Subtypes
The subtypes for exhibitionistic disorder are based on the age or physical maturity of the
nonconsenting persons to whom the individual prefers to expose his or her genitals. The
nonconsenting persons could be prepubescent children, adults, or both. This specifier should help
draw adequate attention to characteristics of victims of individuals with exhibitionistic disorder
to prevent co-occurring pedophilic disorder from being overlooked. However, indications that
the individual with exhibitionistic disorder is sexually attracted to exposing his or her genitals to
children should not preclude a diagnosis of pedophilic disorder.
Specifiers
The “in full remission” specifier does not address the continued presence or absence of
exhibitionism per se, which may still be present after behaviors and distress have remitted.
Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic criteria for exhibitionistic disorder can apply both to individuals who more or less
freely disclose this paraphilia and to those who categorically deny any sexual arousal from
exposing their genitals to unsuspecting persons despite substantial objective evidence to the
contrary. If disclosing individuals also report psychosocial difficulties because of their sexual
attractions or preferences for exposing, they may be diagnosed with exhibitionistic
784
