disorder. In contrast, if they declare no distress (exemplified by absence of anxiety, obsessions,
and guilt or shame about these paraphilic impulses) and are not impaired by this sexual interest
in other important areas of functioning, and their self-reported, psychiatric, or legal histories
indicate that they do not act on them, they could be ascertained as having exhibitionistic sexual
interest but not be diagnosed with exhibitionistic disorder.
Examples of nondisclosing individuals include those who have exposed themselves
repeatedly to unsuspecting persons on separate occasions but who deny any urges or fantasies
about such sexual behavior and who report that known episodes of exposure were all accidental
and nonsexual. Others may disclose past episodes of sexual behavior involving genital exposure
but refute any significant or sustained sexual interest in such behavior. Since these individuals
deny having urges or fantasies involving genital exposure, it follows that they would also deny
feeling subjectively distressed or socially impaired by such impulses. Such individuals may be
diagnosed with exhibitionistic disorder despite their negative self-report. Recurrent
exhibitionistic behavior constitutes sufficient support for exhibitionism (Criterion A) and
simultaneously demonstrates that this paraphilically motivated behavior is causing harm to
others (Criterion B).
“Recurrent” genital exposure to unsuspecting others may be interpreted as requiring multiple
victims, each on a separate occasion; this requirement for multiple victims on separate occasions
is relevant because it increases the confidence in the clinical inference that the individual is
motivated by exhibitionistic disorder. Fewer victims can be interpreted as satisfying this criterion
if there were multiple occasions of exposure to the same victim, or if there is corroborating
evidence of a strong or preferential interest in genital exposure to unsuspecting persons. Note
that multiple victims, as suggested earlier, are a sufficient but not a necessary condition for
diagnosis, as criteria may be met by an individual’s acknowledging intense exhibitionistic sexual
interest with distress or impairment.
Prevalence
The population prevalence of individuals whose presentations meet the full criteria for
exhibitionistic disorder is unknown, although the disorder is highly unusual in women.
Exhibitionistic acts, however, are not uncommon, and single sexually arousing exhibitionistic
acts occur up to half as often among women compared with men. In a Quebec Internet and phone
survey sample, lifetime prevalence of exhibitionistic behaviors was reported to be 30.9% (32.6%
in men, 29.4% in women). Because this same study found that an “intense desire” and “persistent
behavior” occur with much less frequency (4.8% and 0.8%, respectively), the prevalence of
exhibitionistic disorder is likely much lower. For example, a Swedish study suggested that the
lifetime prevalence of exhibitionistic disorder in the general population was 4.1% in men and
2.1% in women.
Development and Course
Adult men with exhibitionistic disorder often report that they first became aware of sexual
interest in exposing their genitals to unsuspecting persons during adolescence, at a somewhat
later time than the typical development of normative sexual interest in women or men. Although
there is no minimum age requirement for the diagnosis of exhibitionistic disorder, it may be
difficult to differentiate exhibitionistic behaviors from age-appropriate sexual curiosity in
