Temperamental.
Environmental.
Exhibitionism.
Manic episode, major neurocognitive disorder, intellectual developmental disorder, personality
change due to another medical condition, substance intoxication, and schizophrenia.
Conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder.
adolescents. Whereas exhibitionistic impulses appear to emerge in adolescence or early
adulthood, very little is known about persistence over time. With or without treatment of
exhibitionistic disorder, the subjective distress (e.g., guilt, shame, intense sexual frustration,
loneliness) or impairment from the disorder may change over time, as may a number of factors
that may potentially affect the course of the disorder, such as psychiatric morbidity,
hypersexuality, and sexual impulsivity. Thus, the severity and course may vary over time. As
with other sexual preferences, advancing age may be associated with decreasing exhibitionistic
sexual preferences and behavior.
785
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Because exhibitionism is a necessary precondition for exhibitionistic disorder,
risk factors for exhibitionism should also increase the risk of exhibitionistic disorder. Antisocial
history, antisocial personality disorder, alcohol misuse, and pedophilic sexual preference might
increase risk of sexual recidivism in exhibitionistic offenders. Hence, antisocial personality
disorder, alcohol use disorder, and pedophilic interest may be considered risk factors for
exhibitionistic disorder in men with exhibitionistic sexual preferences.
Childhood sexual and emotional abuse and sexual preoccupation/hypersexuality
have been suggested as risk factors for exhibitionism, although the causal relationship to
exhibitionism is uncertain and the specificity unclear.
Differential Diagnosis
Individuals with exhibitionism experience recurrent, intense sexual arousal from
the act of exposing their genitals to an unsuspecting person. Unless the individual acts on these
urges with an unsuspecting person (e.g., exposing his genitals to riders on a train) or unless there
is accompanying clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning, a diagnosis of exhibitionistic disorder is not warranted.
Individuals with a major neurocognitive disorder, intellectual developmental disorder,
personality change due to another medical condition, or schizophrenia, or who are in a manic
episode or experiencing substance intoxication, may become sexually disinhibited or have
impaired judgment or impulse control and engage in exhibitionistic behavior. Unless that
behavior occurs at times other than in the context of one of these disorders, a diagnosis of
exhibitionistic disorder should not be made.
Conduct disorder in adolescents and antisocial
personality disorder would be characterized by additional norm-breaking and antisocial
behaviors, and the specific sexual interest in exposing the genitals will usually be lacking.
Comorbidity
Known comorbidities in exhibitionistic disorder are largely based on research with individuals
(almost all men) convicted for criminal acts involving genital exposure to nonconsenting
persons. Hence, these comorbidities might not apply to all individuals who qualify for a
