F65.81
diagnosis of exhibitionistic disorder. Conditions that occur comorbidly with exhibitionistic
disorder at high rates include depressive, bipolar, anxiety, and substance use disorders;
hypersexuality; attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; other paraphilic disorders; and antisocial
personality disorder.
Frotteuristic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from
touching or rubbing against a nonconsenting person, as manifested by fantasies,
urges, or behaviors.
B. The individual has acted on these sexual urges with a nonconsenting person, or
the sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
786
Specify if:
In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals
living in institutional or other settings where opportunities to touch or rub against
a nonconsenting person are restricted.
In full remission: The individual has not acted on the urges with a
nonconsenting person, and there has been no distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other areas of functioning, for at least 5 years while in an
uncontrolled environment.
Specifiers
The “in remission” specifier does not address the continued presence or absence of frotteurism
per se, which may still be present after behaviors and distress have remitted.
Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic criteria for frotteuristic disorder can apply both to individuals who relatively
freely disclose this paraphilia and to those who firmly deny any sexual arousal from touching or
rubbing against a nonconsenting person regardless of considerable objective evidence to the
contrary. If disclosing individuals also report psychosocial impairment because of their sexual
preferences for touching or rubbing against a nonconsenting person, they could be diagnosed
with frotteuristic disorder. In contrast, if they declare no distress (demonstrated by lack of
anxiety, obsessions, guilt, or shame) about these paraphilic impulses and are not impaired in
other important areas of functioning because of this sexual interest, and their psychiatric or legal
histories indicate that they do not act on it, they could be ascertained as having frotteuristic
