sexual interest but should not be diagnosed with frotteuristic disorder.
Nondisclosing individuals include, for instance, individuals known to have been touching or
rubbing against nonconsenting persons on separate occasions but who contest any urges or
fantasies concerning such sexual behavior. Such individuals may report that identified episodes
of touching or rubbing against an unwilling individual were all unintentional and nonsexual.
Others may disclose past episodes of touching or rubbing against nonconsenting persons but
contest any major or persistent sexual interest in this. Since these individuals deny having
fantasies or impulses about touching or rubbing, they would consequently reject feeling
distressed or psychosocially impaired by such impulses. Despite their nondisclosing position,
such individuals may be diagnosed with frotteuristic disorder. Recurrent frotteuristic behavior
constitutes satisfactory support for frotteurism (by fulfilling Criterion A) and concurrently
demonstrates that this paraphilically motivated behavior is causing harm to others (by fulfilling
Criterion B).
“Recurrent” touching or rubbing against a nonconsenting person may be interpreted as
requiring multiple victims, each on a separate occasion; this requirement for multiple victims on
separate occasions is relevant because it increases the confidence in the clinical inference that the
individual is motivated by frotteuristic disorder. Fewer victims can be interpreted as satisfying
this criterion if there were multiple occasions of touching or rubbing against the same unwilling
individual, or corroborating evidence of a strong or preferential interest in touching or rubbing
against nonconsenting persons. Note that multiple victims are a sufficient but not a necessary
condition for diagnosis; criteria may also be met if the individual acknowledges intense
frotteuristic sexual interest with clinically significant distress and/or impairment.
Prevalence
The population prevalence of individuals whose presentations meet the full criteria for
frotteuristic disorder is unknown, but frotteuristic acts, including the uninvited sexual touching of
or rubbing against another individual, may occur in up to 30% of adult men in the U.S. and
Canadian general population. Prevalence of frotteuristic disorder is certainly
787
much lower, considering the finding that “intense desire” and “persistent behavior” were
reported infrequently (3.8% and 0.7%, respectively). In outpatient settings for men with
paraphilic disorders and hypersexuality, approximately 10%–14% have a presentation that meets
diagnostic criteria for frotteuristic disorder. Prevalence among women is likely lower.
Development and Course
Adult men with frotteuristic disorder often report first becoming aware of their sexual interest in
surreptitiously touching unsuspecting persons during late adolescence or emerging adulthood.
However, children and adolescents may also touch or rub against unwilling others in the absence
of a diagnosis of frotteuristic disorder. Although there is no minimum age for the diagnosis,
frotteuristic disorder can be difficult to differentiate from conduct-disordered behavior without
sexual motivation in individuals at younger ages. The persistence of frotteurism over time is
unclear. With or without treatment of frotteuristic disorder, the subjective distress (e.g., guilt,
