Temperamental.
Frotteurism.
Manic episode, major neurocognitive disorder, intellectual developmental disorder, personality
change due to another medical condition, substance intoxication, and schizophrenia.
Conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder.
shame, intense sexual frustration, loneliness) or impairment from the disorder may change over
time, as may a number of factors that may potentially affect the course of the disorder, such as
psychiatric morbidity, hypersexuality, and sexual impulsivity. Thus, the severity and course may
vary over time. As with other sexual preferences, advancing age may be associated with
decreasing frotteuristic sexual preferences and behavior.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Nonsexual antisocial behavior and sexual preoccupation/hypersexuality might be
nonspecific risk factors, although the causal relationship to frotteurism is uncertain and the
specificity unclear. However, because frotteurism is a necessary precondition for frotteuristic
disorder, risk factors for frotteurism should also increase the risk of frotteuristic disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Individuals with frotteurism experience recurrent intense sexual arousal from the act
of touching or rubbing against a nonconsenting person. Unless the individual acts on these urges
with a nonconsenting person (e.g., rubbing his genitals against a passenger on a crowded subway
car) or unless there is accompanying clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning, a diagnosis of frotteuristic disorder is not
warranted.
Individuals with a major neurocognitive disorder, intellectual developmental disorder,
personality change due to another medical condition, or schizophrenia, or who are in a manic
episode or experiencing substance intoxication, may become sexually disinhibited or have
impaired judgment or impulse control and engage in frotteuris-tic behavior. Unless that behavior
occurs at times other than in the context of one of these disorders, a diagnosis of frotteuristic
disorder should not be made.
Conduct disorder in adolescents and antisocial
personality disorder would be characterized by additional norm-breaking and antisocial
behaviors, and the specific sexual interest in touching or rubbing against a nonconsenting person
will usually be lacking.
Comorbidity
Known comorbidities in frotteuristic disorder are largely based on research with men suspected
of or convicted for criminal acts involving sexually motivated touching of or
788
rubbing against a nonconsenting person. Hence, these comorbidities might not apply to other
individuals with a diagnosis of frotteuristic disorder based on subjective distress over their sexual
interest. Conditions that occur comorbidly with frotteuristic disorder include hypersexuality and
other paraphilic disorders, particularly exhibitionistic disorder and voyeuristic disorder. Conduct
disorder, antisocial personality disorder, depressive disorders, bipolar disorders, anxiety
disorders, and substance use disorders also co-occur.
