F65.51
Sexual Masochism Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from the
act of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or otherwise made to suffer, as
manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.
B. The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
With asphyxiophilia: If the individual engages in the practice of achieving
sexual arousal related to restriction of breathing.
Specify if:
In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals
living in institutional or other settings where opportunities to engage in
masochistic sexual behaviors are restricted.
In full remission: There has been no distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other areas of functioning for at least 5 years while in an
uncontrolled environment.
Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic criteria for sexual masochism disorder are intended to apply to individuals who
freely admit to having such paraphilic interests. Such individuals openly acknowledge intense
sexual arousal from the act of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or otherwise made to suffer, as
manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors. If these individuals also report psychosocial
difficulties because of their sexual attractions or preferences for being humiliated, beaten, bound,
or otherwise made to suffer, they may be diagnosed with sexual masochism disorder. In contrast,
if they declare no distress, exemplified by anxiety, obsessions, guilt, or shame, about these
paraphilic impulses, and are not hampered by them in pursuing other personal goals, they could
be ascertained as having masochistic sexual interest but should not be diagnosed with sexual
masochism disorder.
The term bondage-domination-sadism-masochism (BDSM) is broadly used to refer to a wide
range of behaviors that individuals with sexual masochism and/or sexual sadism (as well as other
individuals with similar sexual interests) engage in, such as restraints or restriction, discipline,
spanking, slapping, sensory deprivation (e.g., using blindfolds), and dominance-submission role-
play involving themes such as master/enslaved person, owner/pet, or kidnapper/victim.
Associated Features
The extensive use of pornography involving the act of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or
otherwise made to suffer is sometimes an associated feature of sexual masochism disorder.
