Those who engage in sadomasochistic sexual behavior may experience a hyposensitivity to pain,
although it is unknown whether this finding applies to those with sexual masochism disorder.
Additionally, although it is often assumed that individuals with
789
masochistic sexual interest have a history of childhood sexual abuse experiences, there is
insufficient evidence to support this association.
Prevalence
The population prevalence of individuals whose presentations meet the full criteria for sexual
masochism disorder is unknown. In Australia, it has been estimated that 2.2% of men and 1.3%
of women had been involved in BDSM behavior in the past 12 months.
Development and Course
Individuals with paraphilias living in the community have reported a mean age at onset for
masochism of 19.3 years, although earlier ages, including puberty and childhood, have also been
reported for the onset of masochistic fantasies. Very little is known about persistence over time.
With or without treatment of sexual masochism disorder, the subjective distress (e.g., guilt,
shame, intense sexual frustration, loneliness) or impairment from the disorder may change over
time, as may a number of factors that may potentially affect the course of the disorder, such as
psychiatric morbidity, hypersexuality, and sexual impulsivity. Thus, the severity and course may
vary over time. As with other sexual preferences, advancing age may be associated with
decreasing sexual masochistic preferences and behavior.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
It is important to distinguish self-harming behaviors that occur during collectively accepted
religious and spiritual practices from sadomasochistic behavior conducted for sexual arousal. For
example, collective rituals in various religions and societies include suspension from hooks, self-
flagellation, self-mortification, and other painful ordeals. The role of sexual arousal or pleasure
in these practices remains unknown.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Association of sexual masochism disorder with suicidal thoughts or behavior is unknown.
However, a study of 321 adults who endorsed BDSM involvement found an association of
stigma-related shame and guilt with suicidal ideation.
Functional Consequences of Sexual Masochism Disorder
The functional consequences of sexual masochism disorder are unknown. Individuals reporting
sexual interest in asphyxiophilia seem to experience more sexual distress and psychological
maladjustment than the general population. Individuals engaging in masochistic behavior are at
risk for accidental death while practicing asphyxiophilia or other autoerotic procedures.
However, the proportion of these decedents whose sexual interests and behavior fulfill diagnostic
