Sexual masochism.
F65.52
criteria for sexual masochism is unknown.
Differential Diagnosis
Individuals with sexual masochism experience recurrent, intense sexual
arousal from the act of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or otherwise made to suffer. Unless the
sexual urges, fantasies, or behaviors involving being humiliated or made to suffer are
accompanied by clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning, a diagnosis of sexual masochism disorder is not warranted.
Comorbidity
Known comorbidities with sexual masochism disorder are largely based on individuals in
treatment. Disorders that occur comorbidly with sexual masochism disorder typically
790
include other paraphilic disorders, such as transvestic fetishism. There is some indication of an
association of sexual masochism disorder with borderline personality disorder (based on data
from a small clinical sample of women with and without borderline personality disorder).
Sexual Sadism Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from the
physical or psychological suffering of another person, as manifested by
fantasies, urges, or behaviors.
B. The individual has acted on these sexual urges with a nonconsenting person, or
the sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals
living in institutional or other settings where opportunities to engage in sadistic
sexual behaviors are restricted.
In full remission: The individual has not acted on the urges with a
nonconsenting person, and there has been no distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other areas of functioning, for at least 5 years while in an
uncontrolled environment.
Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic criteria for sexual sadism disorder are intended to apply both to individuals who
freely admit to having such paraphilic interests and to those who deny any sexual interest in the
