Categorical and Dimensional Approaches to Diagnosis
Structural problems rooted in the categorical design of DSM have emerged in both clinical
practice and research. Relevant evidence of such problems includes high rates of comorbidity
among disorders, symptom heterogeneity within disorders, and the substantial need for other
specified and unspecified diagnoses to classify the substantial number of clinical presentations
that do not meet criteria for any of the specific DSM disorders. Studies of both genetic and
environmental risk factors, whether based on twin designs, familial transmission, or molecular
analyses, have also raised questions about whether a categorical approach is the optimal way to
structure of the DSM system.
There is broad recognition that a too-rigid categorical system does not capture clinical
experience or important scientific observations. The results of numerous studies of comorbidity
and disease transmission in families, including twin studies and molecular genetic studies, make
strong arguments for what many astute clinicians have long observed: the boundaries between
many disorder “categories” are more fluid over the life course than has been recognized, and
many symptoms that make up the essential features of a particular disorder may occur, at varying
levels of severity, in many other disorders.
A dimensional approach classifies clinical presentations on the basis of quantification of
attributes rather than the assignment to categories and works best in describing phenomena that
are distributed continuously and that do not have clear boundaries. Although dimensional
systems increase reliability and communicate more clinical information
15
(because they report clinical attributes that might be subthreshold in a categorical system),
they also have serious limitations, and thus far, they have been less useful than categorical
systems in clinical practice. Numerical dimensional descriptions are much less familiar and vivid
than are the category names of mental disorders. Moreover, as yet there is no agreement on the
choice of the optimal dimensions to be used for classification purposes. Nonetheless, with the
increasing research on, and familiarity with, dimensional systems and the establishment of
clinically meaningful cut points to guide treatment decisions, greater acceptance of dimensional
approaches both as a method of conveying clinical information and as a research tool is
eventually likely.
For reasons of both clinical utility and compatibility with the categorical ICD classification
required for coding, DSM-5 continues to be a primarily categorical classification with
dimensional elements that divides mental disorders into types based on criteria sets with defining
features. Despite the categorical framework, it is important to recognize that in DSM-5 there is
no assumption that each category of mental disorder is a completely discrete entity with absolute
boundaries dividing it from other mental disorders or from no mental disorder. There is also no
assumption that all individuals described as having the same mental disorder are alike in all
important ways. The clinician using DSM-5 should therefore consider that individuals sharing a
diagnosis are likely to be heterogeneous even in regard to the defining features of the diagnosis
and that boundary cases will be difficult to diagnose in any but a probabilistic fashion. This
outlook allows greater flexibility in the use of the system, encourages more specific attention to
boundary cases, and emphasizes the need to capture additional clinical information that goes
