physical or psychological suffering of another individual despite substantial objective evidence
to the contrary. Individuals who openly acknowledge intense sexual interest in the physical or
psychological suffering of others are referred to as “admitting individuals.” If these individuals
also report psychosocial difficulties because of their sexual attractions or preferences for the
physical or psychological suffering of another individual, they may be diagnosed with sexual
sadism disorder. In contrast, if admitting individuals declare no distress, exemplified by anxiety,
obsessions, guilt, or shame, about these paraphilic impulses, and are not hampered by them in
pursuing other goals, and their self-reported, psychiatric, or legal histories indicate that they do
not act on them with nonconsenting persons, then they could be ascertained as having sadistic
sexual interest but their presentation would not meet criteria for sexual sadism disorder.
Examples of individuals who deny any interest in the physical or psychological suffering of
another individual include individuals known to have inflicted pain or suffering on multiple
victims on separate occasions but who deny any urges or fantasies about such sexual behavior
and who may further claim that known episodes of sexual assault were either unintentional or
nonsexual. Others may admit past episodes of sexual behavior involving the infliction of pain or
suffering on a nonconsenting person but do not report any significant or sustained sexual interest
in the physical or psychological suffering of another person. Since these individuals deny having
urges or fantasies involving sexual arousal to pain and suffering, it follows that they would also
deny feeling subjectively distressed or socially impaired by such impulses. Such individuals may
be diagnosed with sexual sadism disorder despite their negative self-report. Their recurrent
behavior constitutes clinical support for the presence of the paraphilia of sexual sadism (by
satisfying Criterion A) and simultaneously demonstrates that their paraphilically motivated
behavior is causing clinically significant distress, harm, or risk of harm to others (satisfying
Criterion B).
791
“Recurrent” sexual sadism involving nonconsenting others may be interpreted as requiring
multiple victims, each on a separate occasion; this requirement for multiple victims on separate
occasions is relevant because it increases the confidence in the clinical inference that the
individual is motivated by sexual sadism disorder. Fewer victims can be interpreted as satisfying
this criterion, if there are multiple instances of infliction of pain and suffering to the same victim,
or if there is corroborating evidence of a strong or preferential interest in pain and suffering
involving multiple victims. Note that multiple victims, as suggested earlier, are a sufficient but
not a necessary condition for diagnosis, as the criteria may be met if the individual acknowledges
intense sadistic sexual interest.
The term bondage-domination-sadism-masochism (BDSM) is broadly used to refer to a wide
range of behaviors that individuals with sexual masochism and/or sexual sadism (as well as other
individuals with similar sexual interests) engage in, such as restraints or restriction, discipline,
spanking, slapping, sensory deprivation (e.g., using blindfolds), and dominance-submission role-
play involving themes such as master/enslaved person, owner/pet, or kidnapper/victim.
Associated Features
The extensive use of pornography involving the infliction of pain and suffering is sometimes an
