Sexual sadism.
associated feature of sexual sadism disorder.
Prevalence
The population prevalence of individuals whose presentations meet the full criteria for sexual
sadism disorder is unknown and is largely based on individuals in forensic settings. Among
civilly committed sexual offenders in the United States, less than 10% have sexual sadism
disorder. Among individuals who have committed sexually motivated homicides, the proportion
of sexually sadistic behavior is about one-third.
Individuals with sexual sadism disorder in forensic samples are almost exclusively men, but a
representative sample of the population in Australia reported that 2.2% of men and 1.3% of
women said that they had been involved in BDSM behavior in the previous year. In a
population-based sample in Finland, the lifetime prevalence for sexually sadistic behavior was
2.7% among men and 2.3% among women.
Development and Course
Information on the development and course of sexual sadism disorder is extremely limited.
Whereas sexually sadistic preferences per se are probably a lifelong characteristic, sexual sadism
disorder may fluctuate according to the individual’s subjective distress or his or her propensity to
harm nonconsenting others. As with other sexual preferences, advancing age may be associated
with decreasing sexually sadistic preferences and behavior. Regarding sexually sadistic
preference, many individuals who engage in BDSM behavior became aware of their
corresponding interest in their teenage years.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The legal status of sexually sadistic behavior ranges across countries and societies, suggesting
the potential for variation in distress (because of variation in cultural acceptance) and functional
impairment (because of legal status).
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Association of sexual sadism disorder with suicidal thoughts or behavior is unknown. However,
a study of 321 adults who endorsed BDSM involvement found an association of stigma-related
shame and guilt with suicidal ideation.
792
Differential Diagnosis
Individuals with sexual sadism experience recurrent, intense sexual arousal from
the physical or psychological suffering of another person. Unless the sexual urges to make
another person suffer physically or psychologically are acted on with a non-consenting person, or
unless there is accompanying clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational,
or other important areas of functioning, a diagnosis of sexual sadism disorder is not warranted.
The majority of individuals who are active in community networks that practice sadistic and
masochistic behaviors do not express any dissatisfaction with their sexual interests, and their
