Infliction of physical or psychological suffering during the commission of a sex crime.
Conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder.
F65.4
behavior would not meet DSM-5 criteria for sexual sadism disorder.
Individuals 
who
commit rape or other sexual assaults might inflict pain on their victims as a result of the act of
rape, or in the course of subduing victims or restraining them to commit the sexual assault. Such
instrumental infliction of pain should not be considered to be indicative of sexual sadism
disorder unless there is evidence that the individual is deriving pleasure from the infliction of
pain and the resulting suffering of the victim (e.g., admission of specifically being aroused by the
pain, evidence of a preference for pornography involving themes of sexual sadism, excessive use
of pain-inducing violence that goes beyond what might be necessary in the course of committing
the sexual assault).
Individuals 
with 
conduct 
disorder 
and
antisocial personality disorder may be physically cruel to people and force others to engage in
sexual activity. Coercive or sadistic sexual behaviors that occur in the context of conduct
disorder or antisocial personality disorder but that do not reflect an underlying pattern of sexual
arousal from the physical or psychological suffering of another person should not be used as a
basis for diagnosing sexual sadism disorder. In cases in which the diagnostic criteria are met for
both sexual sadism disorder and conduct disorder/antisocial personality disorder, both disorders
may be diagnosed.
Comorbidity
Known comorbidities with sexual sadism disorder are largely based on individuals (almost all
men) convicted for criminal acts involving sadistic acts against nonconsenting victims. Hence,
these comorbidities might not apply to all individuals who never engaged in sadistic activity with
a nonconsenting victim but who qualify for a diagnosis of sexual sadism disorder based on
subjective distress over their sexual interest. Disorders that are commonly comorbid with sexual
sadism disorder include other paraphilic disorders. According to a population-based study in
Finland, individuals who had engaged in sexually sadistic behavior had also engaged in other
types of paraphilic behavior, namely (in descending order of co-occurrence) masochism (68.8%),
voyeurism (33.3%), transvestic fetishism (9.2%), and exhibitionism (6.4%).
Pedophilic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent, intense sexually arousing
fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors involving sexual activity with a
prepubescent child or children (generally age 13 years or younger).
B. The individual has acted on these sexual urges, or the sexual urges or fantasies
cause marked distress or interpersonal difficulty.
793
