C. The individual is at least age 16 years and at least 5 years older than the child or
children in Criterion A.
Note: Do not include an individual in late adolescence involved in an ongoing
sexual relationship with a 12- or 13-year-old.
Specify whether:
Exclusive type (attracted only to children)
Nonexclusive type
Specify if:
Sexually attracted to males
Sexually attracted to females
Sexually attracted to both
Specify if:
Limited to incest
Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic criteria for pedophilic disorder are intended to apply both to individuals who
freely disclose this paraphilia and to individuals who deny any sexual attraction to prepubertal
children (generally age 13 years or younger), despite substantial objective evidence to the
contrary. The age guideline of 13 or younger is approximate only, because the onset of puberty
varies from person to person, and there is good evidence the average age at onset of puberty has
been declining over time and differs across ethnicities and cultures. Examples of disclosing this
paraphilia include candidly acknowledging an intense sexual interest in children and indicating
that sexual interest in children is greater than or equal to sexual interest in physically mature
persons. If individuals also complain that their sexual attractions or preferences for children are
causing marked distress or psychosocial difficulties, they may be diagnosed with pedophilic
disorder. However, if they report an absence of feelings of guilt, shame, or anxiety about these
impulses and are not functionally limited by their paraphilic impulses (according to self-report,
objective assessment, or both), and their self-reported and legally recorded histories indicate that
they have never acted on their impulses, then these individuals have a pedophilic sexual interest
but not pedophilic disorder. When trying to differentiate child offenders with pedophilic disorder
from child offenders without pedophilic disorder, factors that suggest a diagnosis of pedophilic
disorder in the offender include self-reported interest in children, use of child pornography, a
history of multiple child victims, boy victims, and unrelated child victims.
Examples of individuals who deny attraction to children include individuals who are known
to have sexually approached multiple children on separate occasions but who deny any urges or
fantasies about sexual behavior involving children, and who may further claim that the known
episodes of physical contact were all unintentional and nonsexual. Other individuals may
acknowledge past episodes of sexual behavior involving children but deny any significant or
sustained sexual interest in children. Because these individuals may deny experiences, impulses,
or fantasies involving children, they may also deny feeling subjectively distressed. Such
individuals may still be diagnosed with pedophilic disorder despite the absence of self-reported
