distress, provided that there is evidence of recurrent behaviors persisting for 6 months (Criterion
A) and evidence that the individual has acted on sexual urges or experienced interpersonal
difficulties as a consequence of the disorder (Criterion B). Behaviors include sexual interactions
with children, whether or not they involve physical contact (e.g., some pedophilic individuals
expose themselves to children). Although the use of sexually explicit content depicting
prepubescent children is typical of individuals with pedophilic sexual interests and thus might
contribute important information relevant to the evaluation of Criterion A, such behavior in the
absence of the individual’s sexual interactions with children (i.e., acting on these sexual urges in
person) is insufficient to conclude that Criterion B is met.
794
Presence of multiple victims, as discussed above, is sufficient but not necessary for
diagnosis; that is, the individual can still meet Criterion A by merely acknowledging intense or
preferential sexual interest in children.
Associated Features
Individuals with pedophilic disorder may experience an emotional and cognitive affinity with
children, sometimes referred to as emotional congruence with children. Emotional congruence
with children can manifest in different ways, including preferring social interactions with
children over adults, feeling like one has more in common with children than with adults, and
choosing occupations or volunteer roles in order to be around children more often. Studies show
that emotional congruence with children is related to both pedophilic sexual interest and the
likelihood of sexually reoffending among individuals who have sexually offended.
Prevalence
The population prevalence of individuals whose presentations meet the full criteria for
pedophilic disorder is unknown but is likely less than 3% among men in international studies.
The population prevalence of pedophilic disorder in women is even more uncertain, but it is
likely a small fraction of the prevalence in men.
Development and Course
Adult men with pedophilic disorder may indicate that they became aware of strong or
preferential sexual interest in children around the time of puberty—the same time frame in which
men who later prefer physically mature partners became aware of their sexual interest in women
or men. Attempting to diagnose pedophilic disorder at the age at which it first manifests is
problematic because of the difficulty during adolescent development in differentiating it from
age-appropriate sexual interest in peers or from sexual curiosity. Hence, Criterion C requires for
diagnosis a minimum age of 16 years and at least 5 years older than the child or children in
Criterion A.
Pedophilia per se appears to be a lifelong condition. Pedophilic disorder, however,
necessarily includes other elements that may change over time with or without treatment:
subjective distress (e.g., guilt, shame, intense sexual frustration, or feelings of isolation) or
psychosocial impairment, or the propensity to act out sexually with children, or both. Therefore,
