Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
the course of pedophilic disorder may fluctuate, or the intensity might increase or decrease with
age.
Adults with pedophilic disorder may report an awareness of sexual interest in children that
preceded engaging in sexual behavior involving children or self-identification as an individual
with pedophilia. Advanced age is as likely to similarly diminish the frequency of sexual behavior
involving children as it does other paraphilically motivated and nonparaphilic sexual behavior.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
There appears to be an interaction between pedophilia and antisocial personality
traits such as callousness, impulsivity, and a willingness to take risks without adequate regard for
the consequences. Men with pedophilic interest and antisocial personality traits are more likely
to act out sexually with children and thus qualify for a diagnosis of pedophilic disorder. Thus,
antisocial personality disorder may be considered a risk factor for pedophilic disorder in males
with pedophilia.
Adult men with pedophilia sometimes report that they were sexually abused as
children. It is unclear, however, whether this correlation reflects a causal influence of childhood
sexual abuse on adult pedophilia.
795
Since pedophilia is a necessary condition for pedophilic disorder, any
factor that increases the probability of pedophilia also increases the risk of pedophilic disorder.
There is some evidence that neurodevelopmental perturbation in utero increases the probability
of development of a pedophilic interest.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Laboratory measures of sexual interest, in terms of psychophysiological responses to sexual
stimuli depicting children, which are sometimes useful in diagnosing pedophilic disorder in men,
are not necessarily useful in diagnosing this disorder in women because there has been very
limited research on the assessment of pedophilic sexual interest in women.
Diagnostic Markers
Psychophysiological measures of sexual interest may sometimes be useful when an individual’s
history suggests the possible presence of pedophilic disorder but the individual denies strong or
preferential attraction to children. The most thoroughly researched and longest used of such
measures is penile plethysmography, although the sensitivity and specificity of diagnosis may
vary across sites, which frequently use different stimuli, procedures, and scoring. Viewing time,
using photographs of nude or minimally clothed persons as visual stimuli, is also used to
diagnose pedophilic disorder, especially in combination with self-report measures. U.S.
clinicians, however, should be aware that possession of visual sexual stimuli depicting children,
even for diagnostic purposes, may violate American law regarding possession of child
pornography and leave the clinician susceptible to criminal prosecution. The option exists to use
audio 
stimuli 
describing 
sexual 
interactions 
in 
penile 
plethysmography. 
Across
psychophysiological methods, the diagnostic marker is relative sexual response to stimuli
