Pedophilia.
Other paraphilic disorders.
Antisocial personality disorder.
Substance intoxication.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
depicting children compared with stimuli depicting adults, rather than absolute response to child
stimuli.
Differential Diagnosis
Individuals with pedophilia experience recurrent, intense, sexually arousing fantasies
or sexual urges involving sexual activity with a prepubescent child or children. Unless the
individual has acted on these sexual urges with a prepubescent child or unless the sexual urges or
fantasies cause marked distress or interpersonal difficulty, a diagnosis of pedophilic disorder is
not warranted.
Sometimes individuals present with a different paraphilic disorder but
are referred for an evaluation regarding possible pedophilic disorder (e.g., when an individual
with a diagnosis of exhibitionistic disorder exposes himself to children as well as adults). In
some cases, both diagnoses may apply, whereas in others, it may be the case that one paraphilic
disorder diagnosis is sufficient. For example, an individual who exposes himself exclusively to
prepubescent children may have both exhibitionistic disorder and pedophilic disorder, whereas
another individual who exposes himself to victims, irrespective of the victims’ age, may be
considered to have only exhibitionistic disorder.
Some individuals with antisocial personality disorder sexually
abuse children, reflecting the fact that the presence of antisocial personality disorder increases
the likelihood that an individual who is primarily attracted to mature persons will approach a
child sexually, on the basis of relative access to the child. An additional diagnosis of pedophilic
disorder should only be considered if there is evidence that over a period of at least 6 months, the
individual has also had recurrent, intense, sexually arousing fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors
involving sexual activity with a prepubescent child.
796
The disinhibiting effects of substance intoxication may also increase the
likelihood that an individual who is primarily attracted to mature persons will sexually approach
a child.
There are occasional individuals who complain about ego-
dystonic thoughts and worries about possible attraction to children. Clinical interviewing usually
reveals an absence of positive feelings about these thoughts, no connection between these
thoughts and sexual behavior (e.g., masturbating to these thoughts), and sometimes additional
ego-dystonic, intrusive sexual ideas (e.g., concerns about homosexuality).
Comorbidity
Psychiatric comorbidity of pedophilic disorder includes substance use disorders; depressive,
bipolar, and anxiety disorders; antisocial personality disorder; and other paraphilic disorders.
However, findings on comorbid disorders are largely among individuals convicted for sexual
offenses involving children (almost all males) and may not be generalizable to other individuals
with pedophilic disorder (e.g., individuals who have never approached a child sexually but who
qualify for the diagnosis of pedophilic disorder on the basis of subjective distress).
