F65.0
Fetishistic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from
either the use of nonliving objects or a highly specific focus on nongenital body
part(s), as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.
B. The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The fetish objects are not limited to articles of clothing used in cross-dressing (as
in transvestic disorder) or devices specifically designed for the purpose of tactile
genital stimulation (e.g., vibrator).
Specify:
Body part(s)
Nonliving object(s)
Other
Specify if:
In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals
living in institutional or other settings where opportunities to engage in fetishistic
behaviors are restricted.
In full remission: There has been no distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other areas of functioning for at least 5 years while in an
uncontrolled environment.
Specifiers
Although individuals with fetishistic disorder may report intense and recurrent sexual arousal to
inanimate objects or a specific body part, it is not unusual for non–mutually exclusive
combinations of fetishistic sexual interests to occur. Thus, an individual may have fetishistic
disorder associated with an inanimate object (e.g., female undergarments) or an exclusive focus
on an intensely eroticized body part (e.g., feet, hair), or his or her fetishistic interest may meet
criteria for various combinations of these specifiers (e.g., socks, shoes, and feet).
797
Diagnostic Features
The paraphilic focus of fetishistic disorder involves the persistent and repetitive use of or
dependence on nonliving objects or a highly specific focus on a (typically nongenital) body part
as a primary element associated with sexual arousal (Criterion A). A diagnosis of fetishistic
disorder must include clinically significant personal distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion B). Common fetish objects
