include women’s undergarments, men’s or women’s footwear, rubber articles, leather clothing,
diapers, or other wearing apparel. Highly eroticized body parts associated with fetishistic
disorder include feet, toes, and hair. It is not uncommon for sexualized fetishes to include both
inanimate objects and body parts (e.g., dirty socks and feet), and for this reason the definition of
fetishistic disorder now re-incorporates partialism (i.e., an exclusive focus on a body part) into
its boundaries. Partialism, previously considered in DSM-IV-TR to be a paraphilia not otherwise
specified, had historically been subsumed in fetishism prior to DSM-III.
Many individuals who self-identify as fetishist practitioners do not necessarily report clinical
impairment in association with their fetish-associated behaviors. Such individuals could be
considered as having a fetishistic sexual interest (i.e., a recurrent and intense sexual arousal from
either the use of nonliving objects or a highly specific focus on a nongenital body part, as
manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors), but not fetishistic disorder. A diagnosis of
fetishistic disorder requires concurrent fulfillment of both the behaviors in Criterion A and the
clinically significant distress or impairment in functioning noted in Criterion B.
Associated Features
Fetishistic disorder can be a multisensory experience, including holding, tasting, rubbing,
inserting, or smelling the fetish object while masturbating, or preferring that a sexual partner
wear or utilize a fetish object during sexual encounters. It should be noted that many individuals
with fetishistic sexual interests also enjoy sexual experiences with their partner(s) without using
their fetish object. However, it should also be noted that individuals with a fetishistic sexual
interest often find that sexual experiences that involve their fetish object are more sexually
satisfying than sexual experience without it. And for a minority of people with a fetishistic
sexual interest, their fetish object is obligatory to becoming sexually aroused and/or satisfied.
Some individuals may acquire extensive collections of highly desired fetish objects.
Development and Course
Usually paraphilias have an onset during puberty, but fetishistic sexual interests can develop
prior to adolescence. Once established, fetishistic disorder tends to have a continuous course that
fluctuates in intensity and frequency of urges or behavior.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Knowledge of and appropriate consideration for normative aspects of sexual behavior are
important factors to explore to establish a clinical diagnosis of fetishistic disorder and to
distinguish a clinical diagnosis from a socially acceptable sexual behavior.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Fetishistic behaviors have been reported more in men, but also occur in women. This gender
difference is smaller for fetishistic fantasy than for actual fetishistic behavior. In clinical samples,
fetishistic disorder is nearly exclusively reported in men.
Functional Consequences of Fetishistic Disorder
Typical impairments associated with fetishistic disorder include sexual dysfunction during
