Transvestic disorder.
Sexual masochism disorder or other paraphilic disorders.
Fetishism.
F65.1
romantic reciprocal relationships when the preferred fetish object or body part is
798
unavailable during foreplay or coitus. Some individuals with fetishistic disorder may prefer
solitary sexual activity associated with their fetishistic preference(s) even while involved in a
meaningful reciprocal and affectionate relationship.
Differential Diagnosis
The nearest diagnostic neighbor of fetishistic disorder is transvestic
disorder. As noted in the diagnostic criteria, fetishistic disorder is not diagnosed when fetish
objects are limited to articles of clothing exclusively worn during cross-dressing (as in
transvestic disorder), or when the object is genitally stimulating because it has been designed for
that purpose (e.g., a vibrator).
Fetishistic disorder can co-occur with other
paraphilic disorders, especially sadomasochistic behavior or interests and transvestic disorder.
When an individual fantasizes about or engages in “forced cross-dressing” and is primarily
sexually aroused by the domination or humiliation associated with such fantasy or repetitive
activity, and experiences distress or functional impairment, the diagnosis of sexual masochism
disorder should be made.
Use of a fetish object for sexual arousal (fetishism) without any associated distress or
psychosocial role impairment or other adverse consequence would not meet criteria for fetishistic
disorder, as the threshold required by Criterion B would not be met. For example, an individual
whose sexual partner either shares or can successfully incorporate his interest in caressing,
smelling, or licking feet or toes as an important element of foreplay would not be diagnosed with
fetishistic disorder; nor would an individual who prefers, and is not distressed or impaired by,
solitary sexual behavior associated with wearing rubber garments or leather boots.
Comorbidity
Fetishistic disorder may co-occur with other paraphilic disorders as well as hypersexuality.
Rarely, fetishistic disorder may be associated with neurological conditions.
Transvestic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from
cross-dressing, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.
B. The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
