beyond diagnosis.
Cross-Cutting Symptom Measures
Given that psychiatric pathologies are not reliably discrete with sharp boundaries from one
another, clinicians need to shift their approach to assessment and look beyond the prototypical
presentations that neatly coincide with DSM categories. To assist with that transition, Section III,
“Emerging Measures and Models,” provides the DSM-5 Level 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom
Measure, developed to help clinicians assess all major areas of psychiatric functioning (e.g.,
mood, psychosis, cognition, personality, sleep) and more thoroughly uncover possible disorders,
atypical presentations, subsyndromal conditions, and coexistent pathologies. Just as the review of
systems performed in general medicine acts as an inventory designed to call attention to
symptoms or signs that otherwise could have been overlooked, the DSM-5 Level 1 Cross-Cutting
Symptom Measure acts as a review of mental systems, intended to aid clinicians in better
identifying latent disorders and symptoms in need of more detailed assessment (and potentially
in need of treatment). The DSM-5 Level 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measure is recommended as
an important component of the psychiatric evaluation of individuals presenting for psychiatric
care, with The American Psychiatric Association Practice Guidelines for the Psychiatric
Evaluation of Adults endorsing its use as a first step in identifying and addressing the
heterogeneity of symptoms across diagnostic categories. Self-, parent/guardian-, and child (age
11–17)–rated versions of the DSM-5 Level 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measure are available
online without charge for clinical use at www.psychiatry.org/dsm5.
Removal of the DSM-IV Multiaxial System
DSM-IV offered a multiaxial system of recording diagnoses that involved an assessment on
several axes, each of which referred to a different domain of information. DSM-5 has moved to a
nonaxial documentation of diagnosis. Disorders and conditions formerly listed on Axis I (clinical
disorders), Axis II (personality disorders and intellectual developmental disorders), and Axis III
(other medical conditions) are listed together without formal differentiation, typically in order of
clinical importance. Psychosocial and
16
contextual factors (formerly listed on Axis IV) are listed along with the diagnoses and conditions
using Z codes in the chapter “Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention.”
DSM-IV Axis V consisted of the Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF) scale, representing
the clinician's judgment of the individual’s overall level of “functioning on a hypothetical
continuum of mental health–illness.” This scale has been replaced by the WHO Disability
Assessment Schedule (WHODAS), which is included in Section III of DSM-5 (see the chapter
“Assessment Measures”). The WHODAS is based on the International Classification of
Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) for use across all of medicine and health care.
Cultural and Social Structural Issues
