With fetishism: If sexually aroused by fabrics, materials, or garments.
With autogynephilia: If sexually aroused by thoughts or images of self as a
woman.
Specify if:
In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals
living in institutional or other settings where opportunities to cross-dress are
restricted.
In full remission: There has been no distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other areas of functioning for at least 5 years while in an
uncontrolled environment.
799
Specifiers
The presence of fetishism decreases the likelihood of gender dysphoria in men with transvestic
disorder. The presence of autogynephilia increases the likelihood of gender dysphoria in men
with transvestic disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The diagnosis of transvestic disorder does not apply to all individuals who dress as the opposite
sex, even those who do so habitually. It applies to individuals whose cross-dressing or thoughts
of cross-dressing are always or often accompanied by sexual excitement (Criterion A) and who
are emotionally distressed by this pattern or for whom it impairs their social or interpersonal
functioning (Criterion B). The cross-dressing may involve only one or two articles of clothing
(e.g., for men, it may pertain only to women’s undergarments), or it may involve dressing
completely in the inner and outer garments of the other sex and (in men) may include the use of
women’s wigs and makeup. Sexual arousal, in its most obvious form of penile erection, may co-
occur with cross-dressing in various ways. In younger men, cross-dressing often leads to
masturbation, following which any women’s clothing is removed. Older men often learn to avoid
masturbating or doing anything to stimulate the penis so that the avoidance of ejaculation allows
them to prolong their cross-dressing session. Men and women sometimes complete a cross-
dressing session by having intercourse with their partners, and some have difficulty maintaining
sufficient sexual arousal for sexual activity without cross-dressing (or having private fantasies of
cross-dressing).
Clinical assessment of distress or impairment, like clinical assessment of transvestic sexual
arousal, is usually dependent on the individual’s self-report. The pattern of behavior “purging
and acquisition” often signifies the presence of distress in individuals with transvestic disorder.
During this behavioral pattern, an individual (usually a man) who has spent a great deal of
money on women’s clothes and other apparel (e.g., shoes, wigs) discards the items (i.e., purges
them) in an effort to overcome urges to cross-dress, and then begins acquiring a woman’s
wardrobe all over again.
