Associated Features
Transvestic disorder in men is often accompanied by autogynephilia (i.e., a man’s paraphilic
tendency to be sexually aroused by the thought or image of himself as a woman). Autogynephilic
fantasies and behaviors may focus on the idea of exhibiting female physiological functions (e.g.,
lactation, menstruation), engaging in stereotypically feminine behavior (e.g., knitting), or
possessing female anatomy (e.g., breasts).
Prevalence
The prevalence of transvestic disorder is unknown; however, it appears to be much more
prevalent in men than in women. Fewer than 3% of Swedish men report having ever been
sexually aroused by dressing in women’s attire. The percentage of individuals who have cross-
dressed with sexual arousal more than once or a few times in their lifetimes would be even
lower.
Development and Course
In men, the first signs of transvestic disorder may begin in childhood, in the form of strong
fascination with a particular item of women’s attire. Prior to puberty, cross-dressing produces
generalized feelings of pleasurable excitement. With the arrival of puberty, dressing in women’s
clothes begins to elicit penile erection and, in some cases, leads directly to first ejaculation. In
many cases, cross-dressing elicits less and less sexual excitement as the individual grows older;
eventually it may produce no discernible penile response at all. The desire to cross-dress, at the
same time, remains the same or grows even stronger.
800
Individuals who report such a diminution of sexual response typically report that the sexual
excitement of cross-dressing has been replaced by feelings of comfort or well-being.
In some cases, the course of transvestic disorder is continuous, and in others it is episodic. It
is not rare for men with transvestic disorder to lose interest in cross-dressing when they first fall
in love with a woman and begin a relationship, but such abatement usually proves temporary.
When the desire to cross-dress returns, so does the associated distress.
Some cases of transvestic disorder progress to gender dysphoria. The men in these cases,
who may be indistinguishable from others with transvestic disorder in adolescence or early
childhood, gradually develop desires to remain in the woman’s role for longer periods and to
feminize their anatomy. The development of gender dysphoria is usually accompanied by a (self-
reported) reduction or elimination of sexual arousal in association with cross-dressing.
The manifestation of transvestism in penile erection and stimulation, like the manifestation of
other paraphilic as well as nonparaphilic sexual interests, is most intense in adolescence and
early adulthood. The severity of transvestic disorder is highest in adulthood, when the transvestic
drives are most likely to conflict with performance in heterosexual intercourse and desires to
marry and start a family. Middle-age and older men with a history of transvestism are less likely
to present with transvestic disorder than with gender dysphoria.
Functional Consequences of Transvestic Disorder
