Transvestism.
Fetishistic disorder.
Gender dysphoria.
Engaging in transvestic behaviors can interfere with, or detract from, heterosexual relationships.
This can be a source of distress to men who wish to maintain conventional marriages or romantic
partnerships with women.
Differential Diagnosis
Individuals with transvestism experience recurrent and intense sexual arousal from
cross-dressing. Unless the fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors involving cross-dressing are
accompanied by clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning, a diagnosis of transvestic disorder is not warranted.
This disorder may resemble transvestic disorder, in particular, in men with
fetishism who put on women’s undergarments while masturbating with them. Distinguishing
transvestic disorder depends on the individual’s specific thoughts during such activity (e.g., are
there any ideas of being a woman, being like a woman, or being dressed as a woman?) and on
the presence of other fetishes (e.g., soft, silky fabrics, whether these are used for garments or for
something else).
Individuals with transvestic disorder do not report an incongruence between
their experienced gender and their assigned gender or a desire to be of the other gender; and they
typically do not have a history of childhood cross-gender behaviors, which would be present in
individuals with gender dysphoria. Individuals with a presentation that meets full criteria for
transvestic disorder as well as gender dysphoria should be given both diagnoses.
Comorbidity
Transvestic disorder is often found in association with other paraphilias. The most frequently co-
occurring paraphilias are fetishistic sexual interests or behavior and masochistic sexual interests
or behavior. One particularly dangerous form of masochistic sexual interests or behavior,
autoerotic asphyxia, is associated with transvestic sexual interests or behavior in a substantial
proportion of fatal cases.
801
Other Specified Paraphilic Disorder
F65.89
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a
paraphilic disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet
the full criteria for any of the disorders in the paraphilic disorders diagnostic class.
The other specified paraphilic disorder category is used in situations in which the
clinician chooses to communicate the specific reason that the presentation does not
meet the criteria for any specific paraphilic disorder. This is done by recording “other
specified paraphilic disorder” followed by the specific reason (e.g., “zoophilia”).
