Medication-Induced Movement Disorders and
Other Adverse Effects of Medication
Medication-induced movement disorders are included in Section II because
of their frequent importance in 1) the management by medication of mental disorders or other
medical conditions and 2) the differential diagnosis of mental disorders (e.g., anxiety disorder vs.
medication-induced akathisia; malignant catatonia [a particularly severe and potentially life-
threatening form of catatonia] vs. neuroleptic malignant syndrome; tardive dyskinesia vs.
chorea). Although these movement disorders are labeled “medication induced,” it is often
difficult to establish the causal relationship between medication exposure and the development of
the movement disorder, especially because some of these movement disorders also occur in the
absence of medication exposure. The conditions and problems listed in this chapter are not
mental disorders.
The term neuroleptic is becoming outdated because it highlights the propensity of
antipsychotic medications to cause abnormal movements, and it is being replaced with the term
antipsychotic medications and other dopamine receptor blocking agents in many contexts.
Although newer antipsychotic medications may be less likely to cause some medication-induced
movement disorders, those disorders still occur. Antipsychotic medications and other dopamine
receptor blocking agents include so-called conventional, “typical,” or first-generation
antipsychotic agents (e.g., chlorpromazine, haloperidol, fluphenazine); “atypical” or second-
generation antipsychotic agents (e.g., clozapine, risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine); certain
dopamine receptor blocking drugs used in the treatment of symptoms such as nausea and
gastroparesis (e.g., prochlorperazine, promethazine, trimethobenzamide, thiethylperazine,
metoclopramide); and amoxapine, which is indicated for the treatment of depression.
Medication-Induced Parkinsonism
G21.11 Antipsychotic Medication– and Other Dopamine Receptor
Blocking Agent–Induced Parkinsonism
G21.19 Other Medication-Induced Parkinsonism
Medication-induced parkinsonism (MIP), the second most common cause of parkinsonism after
Parkinson’s disease, is associated with significant morbidity, disability, and treatment
nonadherence, particularly in individuals with psychiatric disorders. Because early recognition is
important, any new case of parkinsonism should prompt a thorough medication history, which is
essential for diagnosis of MIP. A temporal relationship between medication initiation and onset
of parkinsonism should be evident. A host of agents that may be prescribed in individuals with
psychiatric disorders may also induce parkinsonism, but MIP is most often seen upon exposure
