Mental disorders are defined and recognized by clinicians and others in the context of local
sociocultural and community norms and values. Cultural contexts shape the experience and
expression of the symptoms, signs, behaviors, and thresholds of severity that constitute criteria
for diagnosis. Sociocultural contexts also shape aspects of identity (such as ethnicity or race) that
confer specific social positions and differentially expose individuals to social determinants of
health, including mental health. These cultural elements are transmitted, revised, and recreated
within families, communities, and other social systems and institutions and change over time.
Diagnostic assessment should include how an individual’s experiences, symptoms, and behaviors
differ from relevant sociocultural norms and lead to difficulties in adaptation in his or her current
life context. Clinicians should also take into account how individuals’ clinical presentations are
influenced by their position within social structures and hierarchies that shape exposure to
adversity and access to resources. Key aspects of sociocultural context relevant to diagnostic
classification and assessment have been carefully considered in the development of DSM-5-TR.
Impact of Cultural Norms and Practices
The boundaries between normality and pathology vary across cultural contexts for specific types
of behaviors. Thresholds of tolerance for specific symptoms or behaviors differ across cultural
contexts, social settings, and families. Hence, the level at which an experience becomes
problematic or is perceived as pathological will differ. The judgment that a given behavior,
experience, or concern requires clinical attention depends on cultural norms that are internalized
by the individual and applied by others around him or her, including family members and
clinicians. To accurately assess potential signs and symptoms of psychopathology, clinicians
should routinely consider the impact of cultural meanings, identities, and practices on the causes
and course of illness, for example, through any of the following factors: levels of vulnerability
and the mechanisms of specific disorders (e.g., by amplifying fears that maintain panic disorder
or health anxiety); social stigma and support generated by family and community responses to
mental illness; coping strategies that enhance resilience in response to illness or help-seeking
pathways to access health care of various types, including alternative and complementary
treatments; and acceptance or rejection of a diagnosis and adherence to treatments, affecting the
course of illness and recovery. Cultural contexts also affect the conduct of the clinical encounter,
including the diagnostic interview. Cultural differences between the clinician/members of the
treatment team and the individual have implications for the accuracy and acceptance of
diagnosis, as well as for treatment decisions, prognostic considerations, and clinical outcomes.
Cultural Concepts of Distress
Historically, the construct of the culture-bound syndrome was a focus of work on descriptive
phenomenology in cultural psychiatry and psychology. Since DSM-5, this construct has been
replaced by three concepts that offer greater clinical utility:
17
1. Cultural idiom of distress refers to a behavior or linguistic term, phrase, or way of talking
about symptoms, problems, or suffering among individuals with similar cultural backgrounds
to express or communicate essential features of distress (e.g., stating, “I feel so depressed” to
express low mood or discouragement that does not meet the threshold for major depressive
