when the individual attempts to perform a task with the tremulous limb. Individuals may
describe the tremor as “shaking” and report that it may worsen with anxiety, stress, or fatigue.
Parkinsonian rigidity is experienced as an involuntary stiffness and inflexibility of the
muscles of the limbs, shoulders, neck, or trunk. Rigidity is evaluated by assessing muscle tone,
or the amount of resistance present when the examiner moves a limb (and stretches the muscles)
passively around a joint. In lead-pipe rigidity, increased tone is constant throughout range of
motion (in contrast to the clasp-knife rigidity spasticity). Cogwheel rigidity is thought to
represent a tremor superimposed on rigidity. Most common in the wrists and elbows, it is
experienced as a rhythmic, ratchet-like resistance (cogwheeling) when the muscles are passively
moved around a joint. Individuals with parkinsonian rigidity may
809
complain of generalized muscle tenderness or stiffness, tightness in their limbs, muscle or
joint pain, body aching, or lack of coordination.
Bradykinesia and akinesia are observable states of decreased or absent spontaneous motor
activity, respectively. There is global slowing as well as slowness in initiating and executing
movements. Everyday behaviors (e.g., grooming) can be difficult to perform normally and may
be reduced. Individuals may complain of listlessness, lack of spontaneity and drive, or fatigue.
Parkinsonian rigidity and bradykinesia manifest as gait abnormalities, including decreased stride
length, arm swing, or overall spontaneity of walking. Other signs include a hunched posture with
bent-over neck and stooped shoulders, a staring facial expression, and small shuffling steps.
Drooling can arise as a result of reduced pharyngeal motor activity and swallowing, but because
of anticholinergic properties of these medications, it may be less common in antipsychotic-
induced parkinsonism as compared with other medications that cause MIP.
MIP is associated with increased gait dysfunction, falls, and nursing home placement. As
such, MIP is a serious iatrogenic movement disorder in older individuals that warrants
recognition and early diagnosis. Associated behavioral symptoms may include depression and
worsening of negative signs of schizophrenia. Other parkinsonian signs and symptoms include
small handwriting (micrographia), reduced motor dexterity, hypophonia, decreased gag reflex,
dysphagia, postural instability, reduced facial expression and blinking, and seborrhea. When
parkinsonism is associated with severe decreased motor activity, medical complications of
parkinsonism include contractures, bedsores, pulmonary emboli, urinary incontinence, aspiration
pneumonia, weight loss, and hip fractures.
Consistent risk factors are female gender, older age, cognitive impairment, other concurrent
neurological conditions, HIV infection, family history of Parkinson’s disease, and severe
psychiatric disease. MIP secondary to antipsychotic use is also reported in children. The risk of
MIP is reduced if individuals are taking anticholinergic medications.
Differential Diagnosis
Parkinson’s disease and Parkinson’s-plus conditions such as multiple system atrophy,
progressive supranuclear palsy, and Wilson’s disease are distinguished from MIP by their other
signs and symptoms that accompany parkinsonism. For example, Parkinson’s disease is
suggested by evidence of three or more cardinal features of Parkinson’s disease (e.g., resting
