tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia, postural instability), hyposmia, sleep disturbances such as rapid
eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder, and urinary and other autonomic symptoms
common to Parkinson’s disease. These features are less likely to be present in MIP. Individuals
with primary neurological causes of parkinsonism are also susceptible to worsening symptoms if
treated with medications causing MIP.
Nonparkinsonian tremors tend to be finer (e.g., smaller amplitude) and faster (10 cycles per
second) and worsen on intention (e.g., when reaching out to grab an object). With substance
withdrawal, there is usually associated hyperreflexia and increased autonomic signs. In cerebellar
disease, tremor worsens on intention and may be associated with nystagmus, ataxia, or scanning
speech. Choreiform movements associated with tardive dyskinesia lack the steady rhythmicity of
a parkinsonian tremor. Strokes and other central nervous system lesions can cause focal
neurological signs or immobility from flaccid or spastic paralysis, which is characterized by
decreased muscle strength and increased tone on passive movement that gives way with further
pressure (i.e., clasp-knife rigidity). This contrasts with the lead-pipe rigidity and normal muscle
strength in MIP.
Diagnostic alternatives to MIP are also suggested by a family history of an inherited
neurological condition, rapidly progressive parkinsonism not accounted for by recent
psychopharmacological changes, or presence of focal neurological signs (e.g., frontal release
signs, cranial nerve abnormalities, a positive Babinski sign). Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
involves severe akinesia and rigidity, but also characteristic physical and laboratory findings
(e.g., fever, increased creatine phosphokinase).
810
Psychomotor slowing, inactivity, and apathy seen in major depressive disorder can be
indistinguishable from the motor slowness or akinesia of MIP, but major depressive disorder is
more likely to include vegetative signs (e.g., early-morning awakening), hopelessness, and
despair. Negative symptoms of schizophrenia, catatonia associated with schizophrenia, or mood
disorders with catatonic features may also be difficult to distinguish from medication-induced
akinesia. Rigidity may also manifest in psychotic disorders, delirium, major neurocognitive
disorder, anxiety disorders, and functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder).
In parkinsonian rigidity, resistance to passive motion is constant through the full range of
motion, whereas it is inconsistent in psychiatric disorders or other neurological conditions
presenting with rigidity. In general, the constellation of associated physical signs on examination
and symptoms associated with the tremor, rigidity, and bradykinesia of parkinsonism helps
distinguish MIP-related rigidity and bradykinesia from other primary psychiatric causes of
rigidity and decreased movement.
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
G21.0 Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
Individuals with neuroleptic malignant syndrome have generally been exposed to a dopamine
antagonist within 72 hours prior to symptom development. Hyperthermia (>100.4°F or >38.0°C
on at least two occasions, measured orally), associated with profuse diaphoresis, is a
