distinguishing feature of neuroleptic malignant syndrome, setting it apart from other neurological
side effects of antipsychotic medications and other dopamine receptor blocking agents. Extreme
elevations in temperature, reflecting a breakdown in central thermoregulation, are more likely to
support the diagnosis of neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Generalized rigidity, described as
“lead pipe” in its most severe form and usually unresponsive to antiparkinsonian agents, is a
cardinal feature of the disorder and may be associated with other neurological symptoms (e.g.,
tremor, 
sialorrhea, 
akinesia, 
dystonia, 
trismus, 
myoclonus, 
dysarthria, 
dysphagia,
rhabdomyolysis). Creatine kinase elevation of at least four times the upper limit of normal is
commonly seen. Changes in mental status, characterized by delirium or altered consciousness
ranging from stupor to coma, are often an early sign of neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Affected individuals may appear alert but dazed and unresponsive, consistent with catatonic
stupor. Autonomic activation and instability—manifested by tachycardia (rate > 25% above
baseline), diaphoresis, blood pressure elevation (systolic or diastolic ≥ 25% above baseline) or
fluctuation (≥ 20 mmHg diastolic change or ≥25 mmHg systolic change within 24 hours), urinary
incontinence, and pallor—may be seen at any time but provide an early clue to the diagnosis.
Tachypnea (rate > 50% above baseline) is common, and respiratory distress—resulting from
metabolic acidosis, hypermetabolism, chest wall restriction, aspiration pneumonia, or pulmonary
emboli—can occur and lead to sudden respiratory arrest.
Although several laboratory abnormalities are associated with neuroleptic malignant
syndrome, no single abnormality is specific to the diagnosis. Individuals with neuroleptic
malignant syndrome may have leukocytosis, metabolic acidosis, hypoxia, decreased serum iron
concentrations, and elevations in serum muscle enzymes and catecholamines. Findings from
cerebrospinal fluid analysis and neuroimaging studies are generally normal, whereas
electroencephalography shows generalized slowing. Autopsy findings in fatal cases have been
nonspecific and variable, depending on complications.
Evidence from database studies suggests incidence rates for neuroleptic malignant syndrome
of 0.01%–0.02% among individuals treated with antipsychotics. A population-based study
conducted in Hong Kong found an incidence risk of 0.11% in individuals treated with
antipsychotic medication.
811
The temporal progression of signs and symptoms provides important clues to the diagnosis
and prognosis of neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Alteration in mental status and other
neurological signs typically precede systemic signs. The onset of symptoms varies from hours to
days after drug initiation. Some cases develop within 24 hours after drug initiation, most within
the first week, and virtually all cases within 30 days. Once the syndrome is diagnosed and oral
antipsychotic drugs and other dopamine receptor blocking agents are discontinued, neuroleptic
malignant syndrome is self-limited in most cases. The mean recovery time after drug
discontinuation is 7–10 days, with most individuals recovering within 1 week and nearly all
within 30 days. The duration may be prolonged when long-acting antipsychotic medications are
implicated. There have been reports of individuals in whom residual neurological signs persisted
for weeks after the acute hypermetabolic symptoms resolved. Total resolution of symptoms can
be obtained in most cases of neuroleptic malignant syndrome; however, fatality rates of 10%–
20% have been reported when the disorder is not recognized. Although many individuals do not
