contractions (increased muscle tone) and postures that develop in association with use of a
medication known to cause acute dystonia. Any medication that blocks dopamine D2-like
receptors can induce an acute dystonic reaction (ADR). Most commonly, ADRs occur after
exposure to antipsychotics and antiemetic and promotility agents. A variety of other medication
classes are also reported to have induced ADRs, including selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors, cholinesterase inhibitors, opioids, and methylphenidate.
Dystonic reactions vary greatly in severity and location and can be focal, segmented, or
generalized. They most often affect head and neck muscles, but can extend to upper and lower
limbs or trunk. A common presentation is acute oro-mandibular (jaw) dystonia involving the
tongue and mouth with tongue protrusion, or gaping or grimacing postures that can impair
speech (dysarthria) and swallowing (dysphagia) and may evolve into frank trismus (lockjaw).
Involvement of ocular muscles (oculogyric crisis) manifests as involuntary forced and sustained
conjugate deviations of eyes upward, downward, or sideways that can last minutes to hours.
Blepharospasm can also occur. Cervical (neck) dystonia presents as abnormal forward,
backward, lateral, or twisting positions of the head and neck in relation to the body (e.g.,
antecollis, retrocollis, laterocollis, and torticollis). Focal limb dystonia, generally more distal
than proximal, Pisa syndrome (lateral bending of the trunk with a tendency to lean to one side),
and back arching that may evolve into opisthotonos (backward arching of head, neck, and spine)
can also occur. Acute laryngeal dystonia is life-threatening, causing airway obstruction, and
manifests as a “clutching of the throat,” stridor, dysphonia, dysphagia, dyspnea, and respiratory
distress from the medication effects on vocal cords and laryngeal muscles.
At least 50% of individuals develop ADR signs or symptoms within 24–48 hours of starting
or rapidly raising the dose of antipsychotic medication or other dopamine receptor blocking
agent or of reducing a medication being used to treat or prevent acute extrapyramidal symptoms
(e.g., anticholinergic agents). Approximately 90% of affected individuals have onset of ADRs
within 5 days. The symptoms must not be better accounted for by a mental disorder (e.g.,
catatonia) and must not be due to a primary neurological or other medical condition, or a tardive
medication-induced movement disorder.
Fear and anxiety often accompany ADRs given their intense nature, inability of the
individual to control or stop the movements, and, when present, difficulty breathing, speaking, or
swallowing. Some individuals experience pain or cramps in affected muscles. Individuals who
are unaware of the possibility of developing a medication-induced dystonia can be especially
distressed, increasing the likelihood of subsequent medication nonadherence. Thought disorder,
delusions, or mannerisms in an individual with psychosis may cause the affected individual or
others to mistakenly regard his or her dystonic symptoms as a feature of the psychiatric
condition, which could lead to increased doses of the causative medication. The risk of
developing ADRs is greatest in children and in adults younger than age 40 with psychosis, with a
greater incidence in males than females in both children and adults. Other risk factors for
developing ADRs include prior dystonic reactions to antipsychotic medications or other
dopamine receptor blocking agents and use of high-potency typical antipsychotic medications.
Differential Diagnosis
It is important to distinguish between medication-induced ADRs and other causes of dystonia,
especially in individuals being treated with antipsychotic or other dopamine receptor blocking
