medications. A primary neurological or other medical condition is evident
813
based on the time course and evolution of the dystonic phenomena (e.g., dystonia precedes
exposure to the antipsychotic medication or progresses in the absence of change in medication)
and, possibly, other evidence of focal neurological signs. Idiopathic focal or segmental dystonias
usually persist for several days or weeks independent of medication. A family history of dystonia
may also be present. Tardive dystonia secondary to medication exposure, including antipsychotic
medication or other dopamine receptor blocking agents, does not have acute onset and may
become evident when the dose of an antipsychotic medication is lowered. Other neurological
conditions (e.g., epileptic seizures, viral and bacterial infections, trauma, space-occupying
lesions in the peripheral or central nervous system) and endocrinopathies (e.g.,
hypoparathyroidism) can also produce symptoms (e.g., tetany) that resemble a medication-
induced acute dystonia. Other diagnoses that mimic an acute medication-induced dystonia
include anaphylaxis, tardive laryngeal dystonia, and respiratory dyskinesia. Neuroleptic
malignant syndrome can produce dystonia but differs in that it is also accompanied by fever and
generalized rigidity.
Catatonia associated with a mood disorder or schizophrenia can be distinguished by the
temporal relationship between the symptoms and the exposure to antipsychotic treatment (e.g.,
dystonia preceding exposure to antipsychotic medication) and response to pharmacological
intervention (e.g., no improvement after lowering of dose of the antipsychotic medication or in
response to anticholinergic administration). Furthermore, individuals with medication-induced
acute dystonia are generally distressed about the dystonic reaction and usually seek intervention.
In contrast, individuals with the retarded type of catatonia are typically mute and withdrawn and
do not express subjective distress about their condition.
Medication-Induced Acute Akathisia
G25.71 Medication-Induced Acute Akathisia
The essential features of medication-induced acute akathisia are subjective complaints of
restlessness and at least one of the following observed movements: fidgety movements or
swinging of the legs while seated, rocking from foot to foot or “walking on the spot” while
standing, pacing to relieve the restlessness, or an inability to sit or stand still for at least several
minutes. Individuals experiencing the most severe form of medication-induced acute akathisia
may be unable to maintain any position for more than a few seconds. The subjective complaints
include a sense of inner restlessness, most often in the legs; a compulsion to move one’s legs;
distress if one is asked not to move one’s legs; and dysphoria and anxiety. The symptoms
typically occur within 4 weeks of initiating or increasing the dose of a medication that can cause
akathisia, which includes antipsychotic medications and other dopamine receptor blocking
agents, tricyclic antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, dopamine agonists, and
calcium channel blockers, and can occasionally follow the reduction of medication used to treat
or prevent acute extrapyramidal symptoms (e.g., anticholinergic agents). The symptoms are not
better explained by a mental disorder (e.g., schizophrenia, substance withdrawal, agitation from a
