major depressive or manic episode, hyperactivity in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder) and
are not due to a neurological or other medical condition (e.g., Parkinson’s disease, iron-
deficiency anemia).
The subjective distress resulting from akathisia is significant and can lead to noncompliance
with antipsychotic or antidepressant treatment. Akathisia may be associated with dysphoria,
irritability, aggression, or suicide attempts. Worsening of psychotic symptoms or behavioral
dyscontrol may lead to an increase in medication dose, which may exacerbate the problem.
Akathisia can develop very rapidly after initiating or increasing the causative medication. The
development of akathisia appears to be dose dependent and to be more frequently associated with
particular high-potency antipsychotic medications or drugs with higher affinity for central
dopamine receptors. Acute akathisia tends to persist for
814
as long as the causative medication is continued, although the intensity may fluctuate over
time. The reported prevalence of akathisia among individuals receiving antipsychotic medication
or other dopamine receptor blocking agents has varied widely (20%–75%). Variations in
reported prevalence may be attributable to a lack of consistency in the definition, antipsychotic
prescribing practices, study design, and the demographics of the population being studied.
Differential Diagnosis
Medication-induced acute akathisia may be clinically indistinguishable from syndromes of
restlessness due to certain neurological or other medical conditions, and to agitation presenting
as part of a mental disorder (e.g., a manic episode). The akathisia of Parkinson’s disease and
iron-deficiency anemia is phenomenologically similar to medication-induced acute akathisia.
The frequently abrupt appearance of restlessness soon after initiation or increase in medication
usually distinguishes medication-induced acute akathisia.
Serotonin-specific reuptake inhibitor antidepressant medications may produce akathisia that
appears to be identical in phenomenology and treatment response to akathisia induced by
antipsychotic medication or other dopamine receptor blocking agents. Tardive dyskinesia also
often has a component of generalized restlessness that may coexist with akathisia in an
individual receiving antipsychotic medications or other dopamine blocking agents. Antipsychotic
medication and other dopamine blocking agent–induced acute akathisia is differentiated from
antipsychotic medication and other dopamine blocking agent–induced tardive dyskinesia by the
nature of the movements and their relationship to the initiation of medication. The time course of
symptomatic presentation relative to medication dose changes may aid in this distinction. An
increase in antipsychotic medication will often exacerbate akathisia, whereas it often temporarily
relieves the symptoms of tardive dyskinesia.
Medication-induced acute akathisia should be distinguished from symptoms that are better
accounted for by a mental disorder. Individuals with depressive episodes, manic episodes,
generalized anxiety disorder, schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders, attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, major neurocognitive disorder, delirium, substance intoxication
(e.g., with cocaine), or substance withdrawal (e.g., from an opioid) may also display agitation
that is difficult to distinguish from akathisia. Some of these individuals are able to differentiate
