akathisia from the anxiety, restlessness, and agitation characteristic of a mental disorder by their
experience of akathisia as being different from previously experienced feelings. Other evidence
that restlessness or agitation may be better accounted for by a mental disorder includes the onset
of agitation prior to exposure to the causative medication, absence of increasing restlessness with
increasing doses of the causative medication, and absence of relief with pharmacological
interventions (e.g., no improvement after decreasing the dose of the causative medication or
treatment with another medication intended to treat the akathisia).
Tardive Dyskinesia
G24.01 Tardive Dyskinesia
The essential features of tardive dyskinesia are abnormal, involuntary movements of the tongue,
jaw, trunk, or extremities that develop in association with the use of medications that block
postsynaptic dopamine receptors, such as first- and second-generation antipsychotic medications
and other medications such as metoclopramide for gastrointestinal disorders. The movements are
present over a period of at least 4 weeks and may be choreiform (rapid, jerky, nonrepetitive),
athetoid (slow, sinuous, continual), or semirhythmic (e.g., stereotypies) in nature; however, the
movements are distinctly different from the rhythmic
815
(3-6 Hz) tremors commonly seen in medication-induced parkinsonism. Signs or symptoms of
tardive dyskinesia develop during exposure to the antipsychotic medication or other dopamine
blocking agent, or within 4 weeks of withdrawal from an oral agent (or within 8 weeks of
withdrawal from a long-acting injectable agent). There must be a history of the use of the
offending agent for at least 3 months (or 1 month in individuals age 60 years or older). Although
a large number of epidemiological studies have established the etiological relationship between
dopamine blocking drug use and tardive dyskinesia, any dyskinesia in an individual who is
receiving antipsychotic medication is not necessarily tardive dyskinesia.
Abnormal orofacial movements are the most obvious manifestations of tardive dyskinesia
and have been observed in most individuals afflicted with tardive dyskinesia; however,
approximately one-half can have limb involvement, and up to one-quarter can have axial
dyskinesia of the neck, shoulders, or trunk. Involvement of other muscle groups (e.g.,
pharyngeal, diaphragm, abdominal) may occur but is uncommon, especially in the absence of
dyskinesia of the orofacial region, limbs, or trunk. Limb or truncal dyskinesia without orofacial
involvement may be more common in younger individuals, whereas orofacial dyskinesias are
typical in older individuals.
The symptoms of tardive dyskinesia tend to be worsened by stimulants, antipsychotic
medication withdrawal, and anticholinergic medications (such as benztropine, commonly used to
manage medication-induced parkinsonism) and may be transiently worsened by emotional
arousal, stress, and distraction during voluntary movements in unaffected parts of the body. The
abnormal movements of dyskinesia are transiently reduced by relaxation and by voluntary
movements in affected parts of the body. They are generally absent during sleep. Dyskinesia may
be suppressed, at least temporarily, by increased doses of antipsychotic medication.
