The overall prevalence of tardive dyskinesia in individuals who have received long-term
antipsychotic medication treatment ranges from 20% to 30%. The overall incidence among
younger individuals ranges from 3% to 5% per year. Middle-age and elderly individuals appear
to develop tardive dyskinesia more often, with prevalence figures reported up to 50% and an
incidence of 25%–30% after an average of 1 year’s cumulative exposure to antipsychotic
medication. Prevalence also varies depending on setting, with tardive dyskinesia tending to be
more common among chronically institutionalized individuals. Variations in reported prevalence
may be attributable to a lack of consistency in the definition of tardive dyskinesia, antipsychotic
prescribing practices, study design, and the demographics of the population being studied.
There is no obvious gender difference in the susceptibility to tardive dyskinesia, although the
risk may be somewhat greater in postmenopausal women. Greater cumulative amounts of
antipsychotic medications and early development of acute extrapyramidal side effects (such as
medication-induced parkinsonism) are two of the most consistent risk factors for tardive
dyskinesia. Mood disorders (especially major depressive disorder), neurological conditions, and
alcohol use disorder have also been found to be risk factors in some groups of individuals.
Second-generation antipsychotics are associated with a somewhat lower incidence of tardive
dyskinesia compared with first-generation antipsychotics, but the difference is not as large as
once thought, especially when the dose of the first-generation antipsychotic is taken into account;
the most important risk factors are age and cumulative exposure.
Onset of tardive dyskinesia may occur at any age and is almost always insidious. The signs
are typically minimal to mild at onset and escape notice except by a keen observer. In many
cases, tardive dyskinesia is objectively mild but, although it has been thought of as a cosmetic
problem, can be associated with significant distress and social avoidance. In severe cases, it may
be associated with medical complications (e.g., ulcers in cheeks and tongue; loss of teeth;
macroglossia; difficulty in walking, swallowing, or breathing; muffled speech; weight loss;
depression; suicidal ideation). In older individuals there is a greater
816
likelihood that tardive dyskinesia may become more severe or more generalized with
continued antipsychotic medication use. When antipsychotic medications are discontinued, some
individuals experience symptom improvement over time; however, for others tardive dyskinesia
can be enduring.
Differential Diagnosis
It is imperative to distinguish medication-induced parkinsonism from tardive dyskinesia because
the treatments commonly used to manage medication-induced parkinsonism (i.e., anticholinergic
medications) may worsen the abnormal motor movements associated with tardive dyskinesia.
Moreover, treatments used to manage tardive dyskinesia (i.e., VMAT2 inhibitors) may worsen
the symptoms of medication-induced parkinsonism.
Dyskinesia that emerges during withdrawal from an antipsychotic medication or other
dopamine receptor blocking agent may remit with continued withdrawal from the medication. If
the dyskinesia persists for at least 4 weeks, a diagnosis of tardive dyskinesia may be warranted.
Tardive dyskinesia must be distinguished from other causes of orofacial and body dyskinesia.
