disorder). An idiom of distress need not be associated with specific symptoms, syndromes, or
perceived causes. It may be used to convey a wide range of discomfort, including everyday
concerns, subclinical conditions, or suffering due to social circumstances rather than mental
disorders. For example, most cultural groups have common bodily idioms of distress used to
express a wide range of suffering and concerns.
2. 
Cultural explanation or perceived cause refers to a label, attribution, or feature of an
explanatory model that provides a culturally coherent concept of etiology or cause for
symptoms, illness, or distress (e.g., the attribution of psychopathology to “stress,” spirits, or
failure to follow culturally prescribed practices). Causal explanations may be salient features
of local classifications of disease used by laypersons or healers.
3. 
Cultural syndrome refers to a cluster or group of co-occurring, distinctive symptoms found in
specific cultural groups, communities, or contexts (e.g., ataque de nervios [attack of nerves]).
The syndrome may or may not be recognized as an illness in the local cultural context (i.e., it
might be labeled in nonmedical ways), but such cultural patterns of distress and features of
illness may nevertheless be recognizable by an outside observer.
These three concepts (for which discussion and examples are provided in the Section III
chapter “Culture and Psychiatric Diagnosis”) suggest cultural ways of understanding and
describing experiences of distress or illness that can be elicited in the clinical encounter. They
influence symptomatology, help-seeking, clinical presentations, expectations of treatment, illness
adaptation, and treatment response. The same cultural term often serves more than one of these
functions, and usage can change over time. For example, “depression” names a syndrome but has
also become a common idiom of distress.
Impact of Racism and Discrimination on Psychiatric Diagnosis
Clinical work and research in psychiatry are deeply affected by social and cultural constructions
of race and ethnicity. Race is a social, not a biological, construct. It is used to divide people into
groups based on superficial physical traits such as skin color. Although there is no biological
basis for the construct of race, discriminatory practices based on race have profound effects on
physical and mental health.
The social process by which specific categories of identity are constructed on the basis of
racial ideologies and practices is termed racialization. Racialized identities are important
because they are strongly associated with systems of discrimination, marginalization, and social
exclusion. Other aspects of identity, including ethnicity, gender, language, religion, and sexual
orientation, may also be the focus of bias or stereotyping that can affect the process of diagnostic
assessment.
Racism exists at personal, interpersonal, systemic/institutional, and social structural levels.
At the personal level, racism gives rise to internalized stereotypes and experiences of threat,
devaluation, neglect, and injustice that affect individuals’ health and well-being. At the
interpersonal level, racism includes not only explicit behaviors but also microaggressions, which
are everyday slights and offenses that communicate negative attitudes toward specific
stigmatized groups, with stress-inducing and traumatizing consequences. Systemic/institutional
racism refers to the ways that discrimination is embedded in everyday practices of institutions or
organizations, including health care and psychiatry. Systemic racism may not be expressed in
overt racial ideologies but may be maintained by
