These conditions include Huntington’s disease, Wilson’s disease, Sydenham’s (rheumatic)
chorea, systemic lupus erythematosus, thyrotoxicosis, heavy metal poisoning, ill-fitting dentures,
dyskinesia due to other medications such as L-dopa or bromocriptine, and spontaneous
dyskinesias. Factors that may be helpful in making the distinction are evidence that the
symptoms preceded the exposure to the antipsychotic medication or other dopamine receptor
blocking agent or that other focal neurological signs are present. It should be noted that other
movement disorders may coexist with tardive dyskinesia. Because spontaneous dyskinesia can
occur in more than 5% of individuals and is also more common in elderly persons, it may be
difficult to prove that antipsychotic medications produced tardive dyskinesia in a given
individual. Tardive dyskinesia must be distinguished from symptoms that are due to a
medication-induced acute movement disorder (e.g., medication-induced parkinsonism, acute
dystonia, acute akathisia). Acute dystonia and acute akathisia can develop quickly within hours
to days, and medication-induced parkinsonism develops within weeks of initiating or increasing
the dose of an antipsychotic medication or other dopamine receptor blocking agent (or reducing
the dose of a medication used to treat the acute extrapyramidal symptoms). Tardive dyskinesia,
on the other hand, generally develops after more prolonged exposure to antipsychotic medication
(months to years) and can appear after the withdrawal of antipsychotic medication; the minimum
exposure history required for the diagnosis of tardive dyskinesia is antipsychotic medication use
for at least 3 months (or 1 month in middle-age and elderly individuals).
Tardive Dystonia Tardive Akathisia
G24.09 Tardive Dystonia
G25.71 Tardive Akathisia
This category is for tardive syndromes involving other types of movement problems, such as
dystonia or akathisia, which are distinguished by their late emergence in the course of treatment
and their potential persistence for months to years, even in the face of discontinuation of an
antipsychotic medication or other dopamine receptor blocking agent or dosage reduction.
817
Medication-Induced Postural Tremor
G25.1 Medication-Induced Postural Tremor
The essential feature of this condition is a fine tremor occurring during attempts to maintain a
posture, which develops in association with the use of medication. Medications with which such
a tremor may be associated include lithium, β-adrenergic medications (e.g., isoproterenol),
stimulants (e.g., amphetamine), dopaminergic medications, anticonvulsant medications (e.g.,
valproic acid), antidepressant medications, and methylxanthines (e.g., caffeine, theophylline).
The tremor is a regular, rhythmic oscillation of the limbs (most commonly hands and fingers),
head, mouth, or tongue, most commonly with a frequency of between 8 and 12 cycles per
second. It is most easily observed when the affected body part is held in a sustained posture (e.g.,
hands outstretched, mouth held open). The tremor may worsen in severity when the affected
