body part is moved intentionally (kinetic or action tremor). When an individual describes a
tremor that is consistent with postural tremor but the clinician does not directly observe the
tremor, it may be helpful to try to re-create the situation in which the tremor occurred (e.g.,
drinking from a cup and saucer).
Most available information concerns lithium-induced tremor. Lithium tremor is a common,
usually benign, and well-tolerated side effect of therapeutic doses. However, it may cause social
embarrassment, occupational difficulties, and noncompliance in some individuals. As serum
lithium levels approach toxic levels, the tremor may become coarser and be accompanied by
muscle twitching, fasciculations, or ataxia. Nontoxic lithium tremor may improve spontaneously
over time. A variety of factors may increase the risk of lithium tremor (e.g., increasing age, high
serum lithium levels, concurrent antidepressant or antipsychotic medication or another dopamine
receptor blocking agent, excessive caffeine intake, personal or family history of tremor, presence
of alcohol use disorder, and associated anxiety). The frequency of complaints about tremor
appears to decrease with duration of lithium treatment. Factors that may exacerbate the tremor
include anxiety, stress, fatigue, hypoglycemia, thyrotoxicosis, pheochromocytoma, hypothermia,
and alcohol withdrawal. Tremor can also be an early feature of serotonin syndrome.
Differential Diagnosis
Medication-induced postural tremor should be distinguished from a preexisting tremor that is not
caused by the effects of a medication. Factors that help to establish that the tremor was
preexisting include its temporal relationship to the initiation of medication, lack of correlation
with serum levels of the medication, and persistence after the medication is discontinued. If a
preexisting, nonpharmacologically induced tremor is present (e.g., essential tremor) that worsens
with medication, such a tremor would not be considered to be medication-induced postural
tremor. The factors described above that may contribute to the severity of a medication-induced
postural tremor (e.g., anxiety, stress, fatigue, hypoglycemia, thyrotoxicosis, pheochromocytoma,
hypothermia, alcohol withdrawal) may also be a cause of tremor independent of the medication.
Medication-induced postural tremor is not diagnosed if the tremor is better accounted for by
medication-induced parkinsonism. A medication-induced postural tremor is usually absent at rest
and intensifies when the affected part is brought into action or held in a sustained position. In
contrast, the tremor related to medication-induced parkinsonism is usually lower in frequency
(3–6 Hz), worse at rest, and suppressed during intentional movement and usually occurs in
association with other symptoms of medication-induced parkinsonism (e.g., akinesia, rigidity).
818
Other Medication-Induced Movement Disorder
G25.79 Other Medication-Induced Movement Disorder
This category is for medication-induced movement disorders not captured by any of the specific
disorders listed earlier. Examples include 1) presentations resembling neuroleptic malignant
syndrome that are associated with medications other than antipsychotic medications and other
dopamine receptor blocking agents and 2) other medication-induced tardive conditions.
