Antidepressant Discontinuation Syndrome
T43.205A Initial encounter
T43.205D Subsequent encounter
T43.205S Sequelae
Discontinuation symptoms may occur following treatment with all types of antidepressants. The
incidence of this syndrome depends on the dosage and half-life of the medication being taken, as
well as the rate at which the medication is tapered. Short half-life medications that are abruptly
discontinued (or when the dose is significantly reduced) rather than tapered gradually may pose
the greatest risk. The short-acting antidepressants paroxetine and venlafaxine are the agents most
commonly associated with discontinuation symptoms. Antidepressant discontinuation syndrome
may occur in the context of intermittent non-adherence to treatment and therefore may be
irregularly present in some individuals who have not actually stopped taking the medication.
This is especially true for very short half-life medications (e.g., venlafaxine). By contrast, long
half-life medications like fluoxetine seldom produce significant discontinuation effects.
Unlike withdrawal syndromes associated with opioids, alcohol, and other substances,
antidepressant discontinuation syndrome has no pathognomonic symptoms. Instead, the
symptoms tend to be vague and variable. Symptoms typically begin 2–4 days after the last dose
of the antidepressant. For selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, symptoms such as dizziness,
tinnitus, “electric shock”–like sensations, insomnia, and acute anxiety are described. The
antidepressant use before discontinuation must not have incurred hypomania or mixed state (i.e.,
there should be confidence that the discontinuation syndrome is not the result of fluctuations in
mood stability associated with the previous treatment). For the tricyclic antidepressants, sudden
discontinuation has been associated with gastrointestinal symptoms (cramping—reflecting
cholinergic overactivity after stopping an anticholinergic tricyclic antidepressant) as well as
rebound hypomania.
The antidepressant discontinuation syndrome is based solely on pharmacological factors and
is not related to the reinforcing effects of an antidepressant. Unlike the discontinuation of
substances with reinforcing effects like opioids, drug craving does not occur. Also, when a
stimulant is used to augment an antidepressant, abrupt cessation may result in stimulant
withdrawal symptoms (see “Stimulant Withdrawal” in the chapter “Substance-Related and
Addictive Disorders”) rather than the antidepressant discontinuation syndrome described here.
The prevalence of antidepressant discontinuation syndrome is unknown but is thought to vary
according to any of the following factors: the dosage before discontinuation, the half-life (i.e.,
occurring more commonly with short half-life medications) and receptor-binding affinity of the
medication (e.g., more likely to occur with serotonin reuptake inhibitors), and possibly the
individual’s genetically influenced rate of metabolism for this
819
medication. Therefore, discontinuation reactions occur more frequently with short half-life
medications, but may also be influenced by rapid or ultrarapid metabolizer status of cytochrome
enzymes that metabolize the antidepressant.
