Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of
Clinical Attention
This chapter includes conditions and psychosocial or environmental problems that may be
a focus of clinical attention or otherwise affect the diagnosis, course, prognosis, or treatment of
an individual’s mental disorder. These conditions are presented with their corresponding codes
from ICD-10-CM (usually Z codes). A condition or problem in this chapter may be coded 1) if it
is a reason for the current visit; 2) if it helps to explain the need for a test, procedure, or
treatment; 3) if it plays a role in the initiation or exacerbation of a mental disorder; or 4) if it
constitutes a problem that should be considered in the overall management plan.
The conditions and problems listed in this chapter are not mental disorders. Their inclusion in
DSM-5-TR is meant to draw attention to the scope of additional issues that may be encountered
in routine clinical practice and to provide a systematic listing that may be useful to clinicians in
documenting these issues.
For quick reference to all codes in this section, see the DSM-5-TR Classification. Conditions
and problems that may be a focus of clinical attention are listed in the subsequent text as follows:
1. Suicidal behavior (potentially self-injurious behavior with at least some intent to die) and
nonsuicidal self-injury (intentional self-inflicted damage to the body in the absence of
suicidal intent).
2. Abuse and neglect (e.g., child and adult maltreatment and neglect problems, including
physical abuse, sexual abuse, neglect, and psychological abuse).
3. Relational problems (e.g., parent-child relational problem, sibling relational problem,
relationship distress with spouse or intimate partner, disruption by separation or divorce).
4. Educational problems (e.g., illiteracy or low-level literacy, schooling unavailable or
unattainable, failed school examinations, underachievement in school).
5. Occupational problems (e.g., unemployment, change of job, threat of job loss, stressful
work schedule, discord with boss and workmates).
6. Housing problems (e.g., homelessness; inadequate housing; discord with neighbor, lodger,
or landlord).
7. Economic problems (e.g., lack of adequate food or safe drinking water, extreme poverty,
low income).
8. Problems related to the social environment (e.g., problem related to living alone,
acculturation difficulty, social exclusion or rejection).
9. Problems related to interaction with the legal system (e.g., conviction in criminal
proceedings, imprisonment or other incarceration, problems related to release from prison,
problems related to other legal circumstances).
0. Problems related to other psychosocial, personal, and environmental circumstances
(e.g., problems related to unwanted pregnancy, victim of crime, victim of terrorism).
