1. 
Problems related to access to medical and other health care (e.g., unavailability or
inaccessibility of health care facilities).
2. 
Circumstances of personal history (e.g., personal history of psychological trauma, military
deployment).
822
3. 
Other health service encounters for counseling and medical advice (e.g., sex counseling,
other counseling or consultation).
4. 
Additional conditions or problems that may be a focus of clinical attention (e.g.,
wandering associated with a mental disorder, uncomplicated bereavement, phase of life
problem).
Suicidal Behavior and Nonsuicidal Self-Injury
Coding Note for ICD-10-CM Suicidal Behavior
For T codes only, the 6th character should be coded as follows:
A (initial encounter)—Use while the individual is receiving active treatment for the
condition (e.g., emergency department encounter, evaluation and treatment by a new
clinician); or
D (subsequent encounter)—Use for encounters after the individual has received active
treatment for the condition and when he or she is receiving routine care for the condition
during the healing or recovery phase (e.g., medication adjustment, other aftercare and
follow-up visits).
Suicidal Behavior
This category may be used for individuals who have engaged in potentially self-injurious
behavior with at least some intent to die as a result of the act. Evidence of intent to end one’s life
can be explicit or inferred from the behavior or circumstances. A suicide attempt may or may not
result in actual self-injury. If the individual is dissuaded by another person or changes his or her
mind before initiating the behavior, this category does not apply.
Current Suicidal Behavior
T14.91A Initial encounter: If suicidal behavior is part of the initial encounter with the clinical
presentation
T14.91D Subsequent encounter: If suicidal behavior is part of subsequent encounters with the
clinical presentation
Z91.51
History of Suicidal Behavior
If suicidal behavior has occurred during the individual’s lifetime
Nonsuicidal Self-Injury
This category may be used for individuals who have engaged in intentional self-inflicted damage
