to their body of a sort likely to induce bleeding, bruising, or pain (e.g., cutting, burning, stabbing,
hitting, excessive rubbing) in the absence of suicidal intent.
R45.88
Current Nonsuicidal Self-Injury
If nonsuicidal self-injurious behavior is part of the clinical presentation
Z91.52
History of Nonsuicidal Self-Injury
If nonsuicidal self-injurious behavior has occurred during the individual’s lifetime
Abuse and Neglect
Maltreatment by a family member (e.g., caregiver, intimate adult partner) or by a nonrelative can
be the area of current clinical focus, or such maltreatment can be an important factor in the
assessment and treatment of individuals with mental disorders or other medical conditions.
Because of the legal implications of abuse and neglect, care should be used in assessing these
conditions and assigning these codes. Having a past history of abuse or
823
neglect can influence diagnosis and treatment response in a number of mental disorders, and may
also be noted along with the diagnosis.
For the following categories, in addition to listings of the confirmed or suspected event of
abuse or neglect, other codes are provided for use if the current clinical encounter is to provide
mental health services to either the victim or the perpetrator of the abuse or neglect. A separate
code is also provided for designating a past history of abuse or neglect.
Coding Note for ICD-10-CM Abuse and Neglect Conditions
For T codes only, the 7th character should be coded as follows:
A (initial encounter)—Use while the individual is receiving active treatment for the
condition (e.g., surgical treatment, emergency department encounter, evaluation and
treatment by a new clinician); or
D (subsequent encounter)—Use for encounters after the individual has received active
treatment for the condition and when he or she is receiving routine care for the condition
during the healing or recovery phase (e.g., cast change or removal, removal of external or
internal fixation device, medication adjustment, other aftercare and follow-up visits).
Child Maltreatment and Neglect Problems
Child Physical Abuse
This category may be used when physical abuse of a child is a focus of clinical attention. Child
physical abuse is nonaccidental physical injury to a child—ranging from minor bruises to severe
fractures or death—occurring as a result of punching, beating, kicking, biting, shaking, throwing,
stabbing, choking, hitting (with a hand, stick, strap, or other object), burning, or any other
method that is inflicted by a parent, caregiver, or other individual who has responsibility for the
child. Such injury is considered abuse regardless of whether the caregiver intended to hurt the
child. Physical discipline, such as spanking or paddling, is not considered abuse as long as it is
