18
implicit and unintentional biases, habits, routines, and practices that result in misrecognition
and inequity. As a result, individuals can participate in and inadvertently contribute to systemic
racism without consciously endorsing racist ideas. The concept of social structural racism
emphasizes the ways that racism and discrimination are manifested in the organization and
norms of society and public policy with pervasive inequities in economic resources, power, and
privilege that impact exposure to health risk and access to health care. The structural violence
and oppression of racism have physical, psychological, and social consequences, including
negative effects on mental health.
Racism is an important social determinant of health that contributes to a wide variety of
adverse health outcomes, including hypertension, suicidal behavior, and posttraumatic stress
disorder and can predispose individuals to substance use, mood disorders, and psychosis.
Negative racial stereotypes and attitudes affect the psychological development and well-being of
racialized groups. Other adverse consequences of discrimination include unequal access to care
and clinician bias in diagnosis and treatment; for example, misdiagnosis of schizophrenia among
African Americans presenting with mood disorders and other conditions, more coercive
pathways to care, less time in outpatient treatment, and more frequent use of physical restraints
and suboptimal treatments. Clinicians should make active efforts to recognize and address all
forms of racism, bias, and stereotyping in clinical assessment, diagnosis, and treatment.
Attention to Culture, Racism, and Discrimination in DSM-5-TR
During the DSM-5-TR review process, steps have been taken to address the impact of culture,
racism, and discrimination on psychiatric diagnosis in the text of the disorder chapters. A Cross-
Cutting Review Committee on Cultural Issues, composed of 19 U.S.-based and international
experts in cultural psychiatry, psychology, and anthropology, reviewed the texts for cultural
influences on disorder characteristics, incorporating relevant information in the sections on
culture-related diagnostic issues. A separate Ethnoracial Equity and Inclusion Work Group,
composed of 10 mental health practitioners from diverse ethnic and racialized backgrounds with
expertise in disparity-reduction practices, reviewed references to race, ethnicity, and related
concepts to avoid perpetuating stereotypes or including discriminatory clinical information.
DSM-5-TR is committed to the use of language that challenges the view that races are
discrete and natural entities. The text uses terminology such as racialized instead of racial to
highlight the socially constructed nature of race. When the term ethnoracial is used in the text, it
denotes the U.S. Census categories, such as Hispanic, White, or African American, that combine
ethnic and racialized identifiers. The emerging term Latinx (singular and plural) is used in place
of Latino/a to promote gender-inclusive terminology. The term Caucasian is not used because it
is based on obsolete and erroneous views about the geographic origin of a prototypical pan-
European ethnicity. The terms minority and non-White are avoided because they describe social
groups in relation to a racialized “majority,” a practice that tends to perpetuate social hierarchies.
When necessary for clarity in reporting epidemiological or other information based on specific
studies, however, the text uses the group labels from the relevant studies. The term culture is
used not to refer to a discrete social group (e.g., “prevalence differs across cultures”) but rather to
indicate the heterogeneity of cultural views and practices within societies; the terms cultural
contexts or cultural backgrounds are preferred instead.
