T76.31XA Initial encounter
T76.31XD Subsequent encounter
Other Circumstances Related to Adult Abuse by Nonspouse or Nonpartner
Z69.81
Encounter for mental health services for victim of nonspousal or nonpartner adult
abuse
Z69.82
Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of nonspousal or nonpartner adult
abuse
Relational Problems
Key relationships, especially intimate adult partner relationships and parent/caregiver-child
relationships, have a significant impact on the health of the individuals in these relationships.
These relationships can be health promoting and protective, neutral, or detrimental to health
outcomes. In the extreme, these close relationships can be associated with maltreatment or
neglect, which has significant medical and psychological consequences for the affected
individual. A relational problem may come to clinical attention either as the reason that the
individual seeks health care or as a problem that affects the course, prognosis, or treatment of the
individual’s mental disorder or other medical condition.
829
Parent-Child Relational Problem
Z62.820 Parent–Biological Child
Z62.821 Parent–Adopted Child
Z62.822 Parent–Foster Child
Z62.898 Other Caregiver–Child
For this category, the term parent is used to refer to one of the child’s primary caregivers, who
may be a biological, adoptive, or foster parent or may be another relative (such as a grandparent)
who fulfills a parental role for the child. This category may be used when the main focus of
clinical attention is to address the quality of the parent-child relationship or when the quality of
the parent-child relationship is affecting the course, prognosis, or treatment of a mental disorder
or other medical condition. Typically, the parent-child relational problem is associated with
impaired functioning in behavioral, cognitive, or affective domains. Examples of behavioral
problems include inadequate parental control, supervision, and involvement with the child;
parental overprotection; excessive parental pressure; arguments that escalate to threats of
physical violence; and avoidance without resolution of problems. Cognitive problems may
include negative attributions of the other’s intentions, hostility toward or scapegoating of the
other, and unwarranted feelings of estrangement. Affective problems may include feelings of
sadness, apathy, or anger about the other individual in the relationship. Clinicians should take
into account the developmental needs of the child and the cultural context.
Z62.891 Sibling Relational Problem
