This category may be used when the focus of clinical attention is a pattern of interaction among
siblings that is associated with significant impairment in individual or family functioning or with
development of symptoms in one or more of the siblings, or when a sibling relational problem is
affecting the course, prognosis, or treatment of a sibling’s mental disorder or other medical
condition. This category may be used for either children or adults if the focus is on the sibling
relationship. Siblings in this context include full, half-, step-, foster, and adopted siblings.
Z63.0
Relationship Distress With Spouse or Intimate Partner
This category may be used when the major focus of the clinical contact is to address the quality
of the intimate (spouse or partner) relationship or when the quality of that relationship is
affecting the course, prognosis, or treatment of a mental disorder or other medical condition.
Partners can be of the same or different genders. Typically, the relationship distress is associated
with impaired functioning in behavioral, cognitive, or affective domains. Examples of behavioral
problems include conflict resolution difficulty, withdrawal, and overinvolvement. Cognitive
problems can manifest as chronic negative attributions of the other’s intentions or dismissals of
the partner’s positive behaviors. Affective problems would include chronic sadness, apathy,
and/or anger about the other partner.
Problems Related to the Family Environment
Z62.29
Upbringing Away From Parents
This category may be used when the main focus of clinical attention pertains to issues regarding
a child being raised away from the parents or when this separate upbringing affects the course,
prognosis, or treatment of a mental disorder or other medical condition. The child could be one
who is under state custody and placed in kin care or foster care. The child could also be one who
is living in a nonparental relative’s home, or with friends, but whose out-of-home placement is
not mandated or sanctioned by the courts. Problems related to a child living in a group home or
orphanage are also included. This category excludes issues related to Z59.3 Problem Related to
Living in a Residential Institution.
830
Z62.898 Child Affected by Parental Relationship Distress
This category may be used when the focus of clinical attention is the negative effects of parental
relationship discord (e.g., high levels of conflict, distress, or disparagement) on a child in the
family, including effects on the child’s mental disorder or other medical condition.
Z63.5
Disruption of Family by Separation or Divorce
This category may be used when partners in an intimate adult couple are living apart because of
relationship problems or are in the process of divorce.
Z63.8
High Expressed Emotion Level Within Family
Expressed emotion is a construct used as a qualitative measure of the “amount” of emotion—in
particular, hostility, emotional overinvolvement, and criticism directed toward a family member
who is an identified patient—displayed in the family environment. This category may be used
when a family’s high level of expressed emotion is the focus of clinical attention or is affecting
the course, prognosis, or treatment of a family member’s mental disorder or other medical
