Z56.2
Threat of Job Loss
Z56.3
Stressful Work Schedule
Z56.4
Discord With Boss and Workmates
Z56.5
Uncongenial Work Environment
Z56.6
Other Physical and Mental Strain Related to Work
Z56.81
Sexual Harassment on the Job
Z56.9
Other Problem Related to Employment
Housing Problems
Z59.01
Sheltered Homelessness
This category may be used when sheltered homelessness has an impact on an individual’s
treatment or prognosis. An individual is considered to be experiencing sheltered homelessness if
the primary nighttime residence is a homeless shelter, a warming shelter, a domestic violence
shelter, a motel, or in a temporary or transitional living situation.
Z59.02
Unsheltered Homelessness
This category may be used when unsheltered homelessness has an impact on an individual’s
treatment or prognosis. An individual is considered to be experiencing unsheltered homelessness
if residing in a place not meant for human habitation, such as a public space (e.g., tunnel,
transportation station, mall), a building not intended for residential use (e.g., abandoned
structure, unused factory), a car, a cave, a cardboard box, or some other ad hoc housing situation.
Z59.1
Inadequate Housing
This category may be used when lack of adequate housing has an impact on an individual’s
treatment or prognosis. Examples of inadequate housing conditions include lack of heat (in cold
temperatures) or electricity, infestation by insects or rodents, inadequate plumbing and toilet
facilities, overcrowding, lack of adequate sleeping space, and excessive noise. It is important to
consider cultural norms before assigning this category.
Z59.2
Discord With Neighbor, Lodger, or Landlord
This category may be used when discord with neighbors, lodgers, or a landlord is a focus of
clinical attention or has an impact on the individual’s treatment or prognosis.
Z59.3
Problem Related to Living in a Residential Institution
This category may be used when a problem (or problems) related to living in a residential
institution is a focus of clinical attention or has an impact on the individual’s treatment or
prognosis. Psychological reactions to a change in living situation are not included in this
category; such reactions would be better captured as an adjustment disorder.
Z59.9
Other Housing Problem
This category may be used when there is a problem related to housing circumstances other than
as specified above.
