Economic Problems
These categories may be used when an economic problem is the focus of clinical attention or has
an impact on the individual’s treatment or prognosis. Areas to be considered include lack of
adequate food (food insecurity) or safe drinking water, extreme poverty, low income, insufficient
social or health insurance or welfare support, or any other economic problems.
832
Z59.41
Food Insecurity
Z58.6
Lack of Safe Drinking Water
Z59.5
Extreme Poverty
Z59.6
Low Income
Z59.7
Insufficient Social or Health Insurance or Welfare Support
This category may be used for individuals who meet eligibility criteria for social or welfare
support but are not receiving such support, who receive support that is insufficient to address
their needs, or who otherwise lack access to needed insurance or support programs. Examples
include inability to qualify for welfare support because of lack of proper documentation or
evidence of address, inability to obtain adequate health insurance because of age or a preexisting
condition, and denial of support owing to excessively stringent income or other requirements.
Z59.9
Other Economic Problem
This category may be used when there is a problem related to economic circumstances other than
as specified above.
Problems Related to the Social Environment
Z60.2
Problem Related to Living Alone
This category may be used when a problem associated with living alone is the focus of clinical
attention or has an impact on the individual’s treatment or prognosis. Examples of such problems
include chronic feelings of loneliness, isolation, and lack of structure in carrying out activities of
daily living (e.g., irregular meal and sleep schedules, inconsistent performance of home
maintenance chores).
Z60.3
Acculturation Difficulty
This category may be used when difficulty in adjusting to a new culture (e.g., following
migration) is the focus of clinical attention or has an impact on the individual’s treatment or
prognosis.
Z60.4
Social Exclusion or Rejection
This category may be used when there is an imbalance of social power such that there is
recurrent social exclusion or rejection by others. Examples of social rejection include bullying,
teasing, and intimidation by others; being targeted by others for verbal abuse and humiliation;
and being purposefully excluded from the activities of peers, workmates, or others in one’s social
environment.
