The sections on prevalence for each disorder were reviewed to ensure that findings are
presented with clear reference to the geographic areas or social groups included in data collection
(e.g., “in the U.S. general population”); this avoids overgeneralizing the findings to communities
not yet studied. Prevalence data on specific ethnoracial groups were included when existing
research documented reliable estimates based on representative
19
samples. The work group was concerned that data from nonrepresentative samples may be
misleading. This explains the limited inclusion of data on certain ethnoracial groups, notably
Native Americans. There is an urgent need for research on this and other important groups.
Prevalence estimates also depend on the absence of assessment bias; the text indicates when
more research is needed to ensure the accuracy of available data. Users are encouraged to read
the sections on culture-related diagnostic issues to contextualize the sections on prevalence.
Sex and Gender Differences
Sex and gender differences as they relate to the causes and expression of medical conditions are
established for a number of diseases, including a growing number of mental disorders. Sex refers
to factors attributable to an individual’s reproductive organs and XX or XY chromosomal
complement. Gender is a result of reproductive organs as well as an individual’s self-
representation and includes the psychological, behavioral, and social consequences of the
individual’s perceived gender. Much of the information on the expression of psychiatric illness
in women and men is based on self-identified gender, and thus we commonly use gender
differences or “women and men” or “boys and girls” in DSM-5-TR. However, if information is
available and pertinent to “sex”—for example, sex differences in metabolism of substances, or
life stages restricted to only one sex, such as pregnancy or menopause—we use the term sex
differences or “male and female.”
Sex and gender can influence illness in a variety of ways. First, sex may exclusively
determine whether an individual is at risk for a disorder (e.g., as in premenstrual dysphoric
disorder). Second, sex or gender may moderate the overall risk for development of a disorder as
shown by marked differences in the prevalence and incidence rates for selected mental disorders
in men and women. Third, sex or gender may influence the likelihood that particular symptoms
of a disorder are experienced by an individual. For example, ADHD may manifest differently in
boys and girls. Sex or gender may also have other effects on the experience of a disorder that are
indirectly relevant to psychiatric diagnosis. For example, certain symptoms may be more readily
endorsed by men or women, and this endorsement contributes to differences in service provision
(e.g., women may be more likely to recognize a depressive, bipolar, or anxiety disorder and
endorse a more comprehensive list of symptoms than do men).
Reproductive life cycle events, including variations in ovarian hormones during the
menstrual cycle, pregnancy, or menopause, may contribute to sex differences in risk and
expression of illness. Thus, the specifier “with peripartum onset” that can apply to brief
psychotic disorder or to a manic, hypomanic, or major depressive episode denotes a time frame
wherein women may be at increased risk for the onset of an illness episode. In the case of sleep
and energy, postpartum alterations are often normative and thus may have lower diagnostic
