Clinical Attention
Z91.83
Wandering Associated With a Mental Disorder
This category may be used for individuals with a mental disorder whose desire to walk about
leads to significant clinical management or safety concerns. For example, individuals with major
neurocognitive or neurodevelopmental disorders may experience a restless urge to wander that
places them at risk for falls and causes them to leave supervised settings without needed
accompaniment. This category excludes individuals whose intent is to escape an unwanted
housing situation (e.g., children who are running away from home, individuals who no longer
wish to remain in the hospital) or those who walk or pace as a result of medication-induced
akathisia.
Coding note: First code associated mental disorder (e.g., major neurocognitive disorder,
autism spectrum disorder), then code Z91.83 wandering associated with [specific mental
disorder].
Z63.4
Uncomplicated Bereavement
This category may be used when the focus of clinical attention is a normal reaction to the death
of a loved one. As part of their reaction to such a loss, some grieving individuals present with
symptoms characteristic of a major depressive episode—for example, feelings of sadness and
associated symptoms such as insomnia, poor appetite, and weight loss. The bereaved individual
typically regards the depressed mood as “normal,” although the individual may seek professional
help for relief of associated symptoms such as insomnia or anorexia. The duration and
expression of “normal” bereavement vary considerably among different cultural groups. Further
guidance in distinguishing grief from a major depressive episode and from prolonged grief
disorder is provided in their respective texts.
Z60.0
Phase of Life Problem
This category may be used when a problem adjusting to a life-cycle transition (a particular
developmental phase) is the focus of clinical attention or has an impact on the individual’s
treatment or prognosis. Examples of such transitions include entering or completing school,
leaving parental control, getting married, starting a new career, becoming a parent, adjusting to
an “empty nest” after children leave home, and retiring.
Z65.8
Religious or Spiritual Problem
This category may be used when the focus of clinical attention is a religious or spiritual problem.
Examples include distressing experiences that involve loss or questioning of faith, problems
associated with conversion to a new faith, or questioning of spiritual values that may not
necessarily be related to an organized church or religious institution.
835
Z72.811 Adult Antisocial Behavior
This category may be used when the focus of clinical attention is adult antisocial behavior that is
not attributable to a mental disorder (e.g., conduct disorder, antisocial personality disorder).
Examples include the behavior of some professional thieves, racketeers, or dealers in illegal
substances.
