Z72.810 Child or Adolescent Antisocial Behavior
This category may be used when the focus of clinical attention is antisocial behavior in a child or
adolescent that is not attributable to a mental disorder (e.g., intermittent explosive disorder,
conduct disorder). Examples include isolated antisocial acts by children or adolescents (not a
pattern of antisocial behavior).
Z91.19
Nonadherence to Medical Treatment
This category may be used when the focus of clinical attention is nonadherence to an important
aspect of treatment for a mental disorder or another medical condition. Reasons for such
nonadherence may include discomfort resulting from treatment (e.g., medication side effects),
expense of treatment, personal value judgments or religious or cultural beliefs about the
proposed treatment, age-related debility, and the presence of a mental disorder (e.g.,
schizophrenia, personality disorder). This category may be used only when the problem is
sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention and does not meet diagnostic criteria
for psychological factors affecting other medical conditions.
E66.9
Overweight or Obesity
This category may be used when overweight or obesity is a focus of clinical attention.
Z76.5
Malingering
The essential feature of malingering is the intentional production of false or grossly exaggerated
physical or psychological symptoms, motivated by external incentives such as avoiding military
duty, avoiding work, obtaining financial compensation, evading criminal prosecution, or
obtaining drugs. Under some circumstances, malingering may represent adaptive behavior—for
example, feigning illness while a captive of the enemy during wartime. Malingering should be
strongly considered if any combination of the following is noted:
1. 
Medicolegal context of presentation (e.g., the individual is referred by an attorney to the
clinician for examination, or the individual self-refers while litigation or criminal charges are
pending).
2. 
Marked discrepancy between the individual’s claimed stress or disability and the objective
findings and observations.
3. 
Lack of cooperation during the diagnostic evaluation and in complying with the prescribed
treatment regimen.
4. 
The presence of antisocial personality disorder.
Malingering differs from factitious disorder in that the motivation for the symptom
production in malingering is an external incentive, whereas in factitious disorder external
incentives are absent. Malingering is differentiated from functional neurological symptom
disorder (conversion disorder) and other somatic symptom–related mental disorders by the
intentional production of symptoms and by the obvious external incentives associated with it.
Definite evidence of feigning (such as clear evidence that loss of function is present during the
examination but not at home) would suggest a diagnosis of factitious disorder if the individual’s
apparent aim is to assume the sick role, or malingering if it is to obtain an incentive, such as
money.
R41.81
Age-Related Cognitive Decline
This category may be used when the focus of clinical attention is an objectively identified
