Assessment Measures
A growing body of scientific evidence favors dimensional concepts in the diagnosis of
mental disorders. Limitations of a categorical approach to diagnosis include the failure to find
zones of rarity between diagnoses (i.e., delineation of mental disorders from one another by
natural boundaries), need for intermediate categories like schizoaffective disorder, high rates of
comorbidity, need for frequent use of other or unspecified diagnoses, relative lack of utility in
furthering identification of unique antecedent validators for most mental disorders, and lack of
treatment specificity for the various diagnostic categories.
From both clinical and research perspectives, there is a need for a more dimensional
approach that can be combined with DSM’s set of categorical diagnoses to better capture the
heterogeneity in the presentation of various mental and substance use disorders. Such an
approach allows clinicians or others to better communicate particular variation of features that
apply to presentations that meet criteria for a disorder. Such features include differential severity
of individual symptoms (including symptoms that are part of the diagnostic features as well as
those that are associated with the disorder) as measured by intensity, duration, and impact on
functioning. This combined approach also allows clinicians or others to identify conditions that
do not meet criteria for a disorder but are severe and disabling and in need of treatment.
It is expected that as the understanding of basic disease mechanisms for mental and substance
use disorders based on pathophysiology, neurocircuitry, and gene-environment interactions
increases, more objective measures of psychopathology will be incorporated into the diagnostic
criteria sets to enhance their accuracy. Until such time, a dimensional approach depending
primarily on an individual’s subjective reports of symptom experiences along with the clinician’s
interpretation is highlighted by current psychiatric evaluation guidelines as an important step in
enhancing diagnostic practice.
Cross-cutting symptom measures, modeled on general medicine’s review of systems, can
serve as an approach for reviewing critical psychopathological domains across age groups and
diagnoses. The general medical review of systems—a list of questions arranged by organ
systems—is crucial to detecting signs and symptoms of dysfunction and disease with which the
individual may or may not present that can facilitate diagnosis and treatment. A similar review of
various mental systems (or domains), which is the goal of the cross-cutting symptom measures,
can aid in a more comprehensive mental status assessment of individuals at the initial evaluation.
The review of mental systems can systematically draw attention to signs and symptoms of other
domains of mental health and functioning that may be important to the individual’s care. The
cross-cutting measures have two levels of inquiry: Level 1 uses 1 to 3 questions for each of 13
symptom domains for adults (self-rated) and 12 domains for children (ages 6–17, parent rated)
and adolescents (child rated, ages 11–17) to identify emerging signs and symptoms. Level 2
questions provide a more in-depth assessment of certain domains (e.g., depression, anxiety,
mania, anger, irritability, somatic symptoms). These measures are developed to be administered
