both at initial interview and at follow-up visits. Thus, use of these measures can form key aspects
of measurement-based care, the process by which standardized assessment tools are
842
administered and results used to track individuals’ progress over time to guide a more precise
plan of care. Use of these measures ultimately aims to inform measurement-based care by
identifying areas of emerging symptoms and concerns as well as supporting ongoing symptom
monitoring, treatment adjustment, and outcomes critical to the provision of quality care for
individuals with mental and substance use disorders. As a result, these cross-cutting symptom
measures have been identified as important components of psychiatric diagnostic assessment in
clinical practice guidelines.
Severity measures are disorder-specific, corresponding closely to the criteria that constitute
the disorder definition. They may be administered to individuals who have received a diagnosis
or who have a clinically significant syndrome that falls short of meeting full criteria for a
diagnosis (e.g., use of the Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity in
individuals whose symptoms meet criteria for schizophrenia). Some of the assessments are self-
rated, while others are rated by the clinician based on observation of the individual. As with the
cross-cutting symptom measures, these measures can be administered both at initial interview
and over time to track the severity of the individual’s disorder and response to treatment. These
assessments help operationalize symptom frequency, intensity, or duration; overall symptom
severity; or symptom type (e.g., depression, anxiety, sleep disturbance) for many, though not all,
DSM-5 diagnoses (e.g., generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder, psychotic
disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder, autism spectrum disorder, and social (pragmatic)
communication disorder). Data obtained from use of these disorder-specific measures can assist
with diagnosis and inform symptom monitoring and treatment planning.
The World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule, Version 2.0 (WHODAS
2.0) was developed by the World Health Organization to assess an individual’s ability to perform
activities in six areas: understanding and communicating; getting around; self-care; getting along
with people; life activities (e.g., household, work/school); and participation in society. This
version of the scale is self-administered and was developed for individuals with any medical
condition, not just mental disorders. It corresponds to concepts contained in the WHO
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health. This assessment can also be
used over time to track changes in an individual’s level of functioning. Assessment of
functioning is a key aspect of psychiatric diagnostic assessment given that most DSM-5 criteria
sets include a requirement that the disturbance causes clinically significant distress or
impairment in functioning. Individuals with mental disorders are more likely to have severe
impairment in functioning (i.e., communicating or understanding; getting along with others;
carrying out daily activities at work, home, or school; participating in social activities) compared
to individuals with chronic medical conditions. In addition, many individuals seek help for
mental disorders because of the direct impact of their disorders on functional impairment across
multiple domains and settings. Functional impairment may impact prognosis across diagnoses
and, if residual functional impairment remains after symptoms subside, can lead to recurrence or
relapse for conditions such as major depressive disorder and anxiety disorders.
This chapter focuses on the DSM-5 Level 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measure (adult self-
