reliability in postpartum women.
The manual is configured to include information on sex and gender at multiple levels. If there
are gender-specific symptoms, they have been added to the diagnostic criteria. A sex-related
specifier, such as “with peripartum onset” of a mood episode, provides additional information on
sex and diagnosis. Prevalence estimates based on sex and gender are included in the
“Prevalence” section of each disorder text. Finally, other issues that are pertinent to diagnosis
and influenced by sex and/or gender considerations can be found in the section “Sex- and
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues” in the text for relevant disorders.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
DSM-5-TR contains a new text section for each diagnosis, “Association With Suicidal Thoughts
or Behavior,” when such information is available in the literature. The information included is
generally based on studies demonstrating associations of suicidal thoughts
20
or behavior with a given diagnosis. Within groups of individuals with the same diagnosis, a wide
range of relevant psychopathology could have an impact on suicide risk, ranging from none to
severe. Therefore, in the assessment of a specific individual’s suicide risk, clinicians should use
clinical judgment informed by known risk factors and not rely solely on the presence of a
diagnosis that has been associated with suicidal thoughts or behavior. The information in these
sections should serve as an alert to clinicians that further inquiry may be indicated for an
individual with a particular diagnosis. Clinical risk assessment requires an individualized
assessment encompassing many factors and goes well beyond the formulation of a DSM-5
diagnosis and the scope of this manual.
Additional Resources and Future Directions
Conditions for Further Study
Described in Section III, “Conditions for Further Study,” are those proposed conditions for
which sufficient scientific evidence is not yet available to support widespread clinical use. These
proposed criteria and supporting text are included to highlight conditions that could benefit from
further research.
Assessment and Monitoring Tools: Now and Looking to the
Future
The various components of DSM-5 are provided to facilitate clinical assessment and to aid in
developing a comprehensive case formulation (see “Use of the Manual”) and identification of
characteristics that can influence the prognosis of any diagnosed mental disorders. Whereas the
diagnostic criteria in Section II are well established and have undergone extensive review, the
