rated and parent/guardian versions); the Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom
Severity; and the WHODAS 2.0. Clinician instructions, scoring information, and interpretation
guidelines are included for each. Description of the child-rated version is not included in print
given the overall similarity in items, scoring, and clinician instructions and guidelines with the
parent/guardian-rated version. These measures, including the child-rated version, and additional
dimensional assessments, such as those for diagnostic severity, can be found online at
www.psychiatry.org/dsm5.
843
Cross-Cutting Symptom Measures
Level 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measure
The DSM-5 Level 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measure is a self- or informant-rated measure that
assesses domains that are important across psychiatric diagnoses. It is intended to help clinicians
identify additional areas of inquiry that may have significant impact on the individual’s treatment
and prognosis. In addition, the measure may be used to track changes in the individual’s
symptom presentation over time.
The adult version of the measure consists of 23 questions that assess 13 psychiatric domains,
including depression, anger, mania, anxiety, somatic symptoms, suicidal ideation, psychosis,
sleep problems, memory, repetitive thoughts and behaviors, dissociation, personality functioning,
and substance use (Table 1). Each domain consists of one to three questions. Each item inquires
about how much (or how often) the individual has been bothered by the specific symptom during
the past 2 weeks. If the individual is of impaired capacity and unable to complete the form (e.g.,
an individual with major neurocognitive disorder), a knowledgeable adult informant may
complete this measure.
844
TABLE 1 Adult DSM-5 Self-Rated Level 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measure: 13
domains, thresholds for further inquiry, and associated DSM-5 Level 2
measures
Domain Domain name
Threshold to guide
further inquiry
DSM-5 Level 2 Cross-Cutting Symptom
Measurea
I.
Depression
Mild or greater
Level 2—Depression—Adult (PROMIS
Emotional Distress—Short Form)
II.
Anger
Mild or greater
Level 2—Anger—Adult (PROMIS Emotional
Distress—Anger—Short Form)
III.
Mania
Mild or greater
Level 2—Mania—Adult (Altman Self-Rating
Mania Scale [ASRM])
IV.
Anxiety
Mild or greater
Level 2—Anxiety—Adult (PROMIS Emotional
Distress—Anxiety—Short Form)
V.
Somatic symptoms
Mild or greater
Level 2—Somatic Symptom—Adult (Patient
Health Questionnaire–15 [PHQ-15] Somatic
Symptom Severity Scale)
