VI.
Suicidal ideation
Slight or greater
None
VII.
Psychosis
Slight or greater
None
VIII.
Sleep problems
Mild or greater
Level 2—Sleep Disturbance—Adult (PROMIS
Sleep Disturbance—Short Form)
IX.
Memory
Mild or greater
None
X.
Repetitive thoughts and
behaviors
Mild or greater
Level 2—Repetitive Thoughts and Behaviors—
Adult (Florida Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory
[FOCI] Severity Scale)
XI.
Dissociation
Mild or greater
None
XII.
Personality functioning
Mild or greater
None
XIII.
Substance use
Slight or greater
Level 2—Substance Use—Adult (adapted from
the NIDA-Modified ASSIST)
Note. NIDA = National Institute on Drug Abuse.
aAvailable at www.psychiatry.org/dsm5.
The measure was found to be clinically useful and to have good reliability in the DSM-5
Field Trials that were conducted in adult clinical samples across the United States and in Canada.
In the DSM-5 Field Trials, in which the individual’s symptom ratings were shared with the
clinician before meeting, individuals reported that the results from the measure helped facilitate
communication during the clinical encounter. Similarly, clinicians in both major academic-
medical research institutions as well as routine clinical practice settings found the measures
clinically useful and feasible for integration into everyday clinical care as well as specialty
clinical settings. In addition to results from the DSM-5 Field Trials, several studies have
evaluated the psychometric properties of the adult self-rated version of the cross-cutting
symptom measure in a variety of populations. For example, findings from a large study of non-
treatment-seeking college students across the United States demonstrated acceptable internal
consistency and internal validity.
The parent/guardian-rated version of the measure (for children ages 6–17) consists of 25
questions that assess 12 psychiatric domains, including depression, anger, irritability, mania,
anxiety, somatic symptoms, inattention, suicidal ideation/attempt, psychosis, sleep disturbance,
repetitive thoughts and behaviors, and substance use (Table 2). Each item asks the parent or
guardian to rate how much (or how often) his or her child has been bothered by the specific
psychiatric symptom during the past 2 weeks. The measure was also found to be clinically useful
and to have good reliability in the DSM-5 Field Trials that were conducted in pediatric clinical
samples across the United States. For children ages 11–17, along with the parent/guardian rating
of the child’s symptoms, the clinician may consider having the child complete the child-rated
version of the measure. The child-rated version of the measure can be found online at
www.psychiatry.org/dsm5.
845
TABLE 2 Parent/guardian-rated DSM-5 Level 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measure
for child age 6–17: 12 domains, thresholds for further inquiry, and
associated Level 2 measures
Threshold to guide
DSM-5 Level 2 Cross-Cutting Symptom
