may include the Level 2 cross-cutting symptom assessment for the domain (see 1). For substance
use, suicidal ideation, and psychosis, a rating of slight (i.e., 1) or greater on any item within the
domain may serve as a guide for additional inquiry and follow-up to determine if a more detailed
assessment is needed. As such, the rater should indicate the highest score within a domain in the
“Highest domain score” column. Table 1 outlines threshold scores that may guide further inquiry
for the remaining domains.
On the parent/guardian-rated version of the measure (for children ages 6–17), 19 of the 25
items are each rated on a 5-point scale (0 = none or not at all; 1 = slight or rare, less than a day or
two; 2 = mild or several days; 3 = moderate or more than half the days; and 4 = severe or nearly
every day). The suicidal ideation, suicide attempt, and substance abuse items are each rated on a
“Yes, No, or Don’t Know” scale. The score on each item within a domain should be reviewed by
the clinician to understand which specific symptom within a domain is most problematic (e.g.,
visual or auditory hallucination on the psychosis domain) to help guide further inquiry. However,
with the exception of inattention and psychosis, a rating of mild (i.e., 2) or greater on any item
within a domain that is scored on the 5-point scale may serve as a guide for additional inquiry
and follow-up to determine if a more detailed assessment is necessary, which may include the
Level 2 cross-cutting symptom assessment for the domain (see Table 2). For inattention or
psychosis, a rating of slight or greater (i.e., 1 or greater) may be used as an indicator for
additional inquiry. A parent or guardian’s rating of “Don’t Know” on the suicidal ideation,
suicide attempt, and any of the substance use items, especially for children ages 11–17 years,
may result in additional probing of the issues with the child, including using the child-rated
Level 2 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measure for the relevant domain. Because additional inquiry is
made on the basis of the highest score on any item within a domain, clinicians should indicate
that score in the “Highest Domain Score” column. Table 2 outlines threshold scores that may
guide further inquiry for the remaining domains.
The clinician instructions and guidelines for the child-rated version are similar to those of the
parent/guardian-rated version described above with the exception of the “Don’t Know” response
categories, which are not present in the child-rated version (see www.psychiatry.org/dsm5).
Level 2 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measures
Any threshold scores on the Level 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measure (as noted in Tables 1 and
2 and described in “Scoring and Interpretation”) indicate a possible need for detailed clinical
inquiry. Level 2 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measures provide one method of obtaining more in-
depth information on potentially significant symptoms to inform diagnosis, treatment planning,
and follow-up. They are available online at www.psychiatry.org/dsm5. Tables 1 and 2 outline
each Level 1 domain and identify the domains for which DSM-5 Level 2 Cross-Cutting
Symptom Measures are available for more detailed assessments. Adult and pediatric (parent and
child) versions are available online for most Level 1 symptom domains.
Frequency of Use of the Cross-Cutting Symptom Measures
To track change in the individual’s symptom presentation over time, the Level 1 and relevant
Level 2 cross-cutting symptom measures may be completed at regular intervals as clinically
indicated, depending on the stability of the individual’s symptoms and treatment status. For
individuals with impaired capacity and for children ages 6–17 years, it is preferable for the
