WHODAS 2.0 summary scores.
WHODAS 2.0 domain scores.
or restlessness)
Note. SD = standard deviation; SES = socioeconomic status.
854
World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0
The adult self-administered version of the World Health Organization Disability Assessment
Schedule 2.0 (WHODAS 2.0) is a 36-item measure that assesses disability in adults age 18 years
and older. It has been validated across numerous cultures worldwide and demonstrated
sensitivity to change. It assesses disability across six domains, including understanding and
communicating, getting around, self-care, getting along with people, life activities (i.e.,
household, work, and/or school activities), and participation in society. If the adult individual is
of impaired capacity and unable to complete the form (e.g., a patient with major neurocognitive
disorder), a knowledgeable informant may complete the proxy-administered version of the
measure, which is available at www.psychiatry.org/dsm5. Each item on the self-administered
version of the WHODAS 2.0 asks the individual to rate how much difficulty he or she has had in
specific areas of functioning during the past 30 days.
WHODAS 2.0 Scoring Instructions Provided by WHO
There are two basic options for computing the summary scores for
the WHODAS 2.0 36-item full version.
Simple: The scores assigned to each of the items—“none” (1), “mild” (2), “moderate” (3),
“severe” (4), and “extreme” (5)—are summed for a maximum total raw score of 180. This
method is referred to as simple scoring because the scores from each of the items are simply
added up without recoding or collapsing of response categories; thus, there is no weighting of
individual items. This approach is practical to use as a hand-scoring approach, and may be the
method of choice in busy clinical settings or in paper-and-pencil interview situations. As a result,
the simple sum of the scores of the items across all domains constitutes a statistic that is
sufficient to describe the degree of functional limitations.
Complex: The more complex method of scoring is called “item-response-theory” (IRT)–
based scoring. It takes into account multiple levels of difficulty for each WHODAS 2.0 item. It
takes the coding for each item response as “none,” “mild,” “moderate,” “severe,” and “extreme”
separately, and then requires a computer to determine the summary score by differentially
weighting the items and the levels of severity. The computer program is available from the WHO
Web site. The scoring has three steps:
Step 1—Summing of recoded item scores within each domain (i.e., for each item, the response options 1–5 are converted to
a rate of 0–4, leading to a total raw score of 144).
Step 2—Summing of all six domain scores.
Step 3—Converting the summary score into a metric ranging from 0 to 100 (where 0 = no disability; 100 = full disability).
WHODAS 2.0 produces domain-specific scores for six different
functioning domains: cognition, mobility, self-care, getting along, life activities (household and
