WHODAS 2.0 population norms.
work/school), and participation.
For the population norms for IRT-based scoring of the WHODAS
2.0 and for the population distribution of IRT-based scores for WHODAS 2.0, please see
www.who.int/classifications/icf/Pop_norms_distrib_IRT_scores.pdf.
855
Additional Scoring and Interpretation Guidance for DSM-5-TR Users
The clinician is asked to review the individual’s response on each item on the measure during the
clinical interview and to indicate the self-reported score for each item in the section provided for
“Clinician Use Only.” However, if the clinician determines that the score on an item should be
different based on the clinical interview and other information available, he or she may indicate a
corrected score in the raw item score box. Based on findings from the DSM-5 Field Trials in
adult patient samples across six sites in the United States and one in Canada, DSM-5-TR
recommends calculation and use of average scores for each domain and for general disability.
The average scores are comparable to the WHODAS 5-point scale, which allows the clinician to
think of the individual’s disability in terms of none (1), mild (2), moderate (3), severe (4), or
extreme (5). The average domain and general disability scores were found to be reliable, easy to
use, and clinically useful to the clinicians in the DSM-5 Field Trials. The average domain score
is calculated by dividing the raw domain score by the number of items in the domain (e.g., if all
the items within the “understanding and communicating” domain are rated as being moderate,
then the average domain score would be 18/6 = 3, indicating moderate disability). The average
general disability score is calculated by dividing the raw overall score by number of items in the
measure (i.e., 36). The individual should be encouraged to complete all of the items on the
WHODAS 2.0. If no response is given on 10 or more items of the measure (i.e., more than 25%
of the 36 total items), calculation of the simple and average general disability scores may not be
helpful. If 10 or more of the total items on the measure are missing but the items for some of the
domains are 75%–100% complete, the simple or average domain scores may be used for those
domains.
Frequency of Use
To track change in the individual’s level of disability over time, the measure may be completed
at regular intervals as clinically indicated, depending on the stability of the individual’s
symptoms and treatment status. Consistently high scores on a particular domain may indicate
significant and problematic areas for the individual that might warrant further assessment and
intervention.
856
