Culture and Psychiatric Diagnosis
This chapter provides basic information on integrating culture and social context in
clinical diagnoses, with sections on key terms, cultural formulation, and cultural concepts of
distress.
The first section defines terms that are essential to the rest of the chapter: culture, race, and ethnicity.
The Cultural Formulation section presents an outline for a systematic person-centered cultural assessment that is designed to
be used by any clinician providing services to any individual in any care setting. This section also includes an interview
protocol, the Cultural Formulation Interview, that operationalizes these components. Symptom presentations, interpretations
of the illness or predicament that precipitates care, and help-seeking expectations are always influenced by individuals’
cultural backgrounds and sociocultural contexts. A person-centered cultural assessment can help improve the care of every
individual, regardless of his or her background. Cultural formulation may be especially helpful for individuals who are
affected by healthcare disparities driven by systemic disadvantage and discrimination.
The Cultural Concepts of Distress section describes the ways individuals express, report, and interpret experiences of illness
and distress. Cultural concepts of distress include idioms, explanations or perceived causes, and syndromes. Symptoms are
expressed and communicated using cultural idioms of distress—behaviors or linguistic terms, metaphors, phrases, or ways
of talking about symptoms, problems, or suffering that are commonly used by individuals with similar cultural backgrounds
to convey a wide range of concerns. Such idioms may be used for a broad spectrum of distress and may not indicate a
psychiatric disorder. Common contemporary idioms in the United States include “burnout,” “feeling stressed,” “nervous
breakdown,” and “feeling depressed,” in the sense of experiencing dissatisfaction or discouragement that does not meet
criteria for any psychiatric disorder. Culturally specific explanations and syndromes are also common and distributed widely
across populations. This section also provides some illustrative examples of idioms, explanations, and syndromes from
diverse geographic regions. The examples were chosen because they have been well studied and their lack of familiarity to
many U.S. clinicians highlights their specific verbal and behavioral expressions and communicative functions.
Key Terms
Understanding the cultural context of illness experience is essential for effective diagnostic
assessment and clinical management.
860
Culture refers to systems of knowledge, concepts, values, norms, and practices that are
learned and transmitted across generations. Culture includes language, religion and spirituality,
family structures, life-cycle stages, ceremonial rituals, customs, and ways of understanding
health and illness, as well as moral, political, economic, and legal systems. Cultures are open,
dynamic systems that undergo continuous change over time; in the contemporary world, most
