individuals and groups are exposed to multiple cultural contexts, which they use to fashion their
own identities and make sense of experience. This process of meaning-making derives from
developmental and everyday social experiences in specific contexts, including health care, which
may vary for each individual. Much of culture involves background knowledge, values, and
assumptions that remain implicit or presumed and so may be difficult for individuals to describe.
These features of culture make it crucial not to overgeneralize cultural information or stereotype
groups in terms of fixed cultural traits. In relation to diagnosis, it is essential to recognize that all
forms of illness and distress, including the DSM disorders, are shaped by cultural contexts.
Culture influences how individuals fashion their identities, as well as how they interpret and
respond to symptoms and illness.
Race is a social, not a biological, construct that divides humanity into groups based on a
variety of superficial physical traits such as skin color that have been falsely viewed as indicating
attributes and capacities assumed to be inherent to the group. Racial categories and constructs
have varied over history and across societies and have been used to justify systems of
oppression, slavery, and genocide. The construct of race is important for psychiatry because it
can lead to racial ideologies, racism, discrimination, and social oppression and exclusion, which
have strong negative effects on mental health. There is evidence that racism can exacerbate many
psychiatric disorders, contributing to poor outcome, and that racial biases can affect diagnostic
assessment.
Ethnicity is a culturally constructed group identity used to define peoples and communities. It
may be rooted in a common history, ancestry, geography, language, religion, or other shared
characteristics of a group, which distinguish that group from others. Ethnicity may be self-
assigned or attributed by outsiders. Increasing mobility, intermarriage, and intermixing of
cultural groups have defined new mixed, multiple, or hybrid ethnic identities. These processes
may also lead to the dilution of ethnic identification.
Culture, race, and ethnicity may be related to political, economic, and social structural
inequities associated with racism and discrimination resulting in health disparities. Cultural,
ethnic, and racialized identities can be sources of strength and group support that enhance
resilience. They may also lead to psychological, interpersonal, and intergenerational conflict or
difficulties in adaptation that require socially and culturally informed diagnosis and clinical
assessment. Additional key terms related to racialization and racism are defined in the DSM-5-
TR Section I Introduction, under “Cultural and Social Structural Issues,” in the subsection
“Impact of Racism and Discrimination on Psychiatric Diagnosis.”
Cultural Formulation
Outline for Cultural Formulation
The Outline for Cultural Formulation introduced in DSM-IV provided a framework for assessing
information about cultural features of an individual’s mental health problem and how it relates to
a social and cultural context and history. This assessment provides useful information on social
context and illness experience relevant to the assessment of every individual, not only those
whose cultural background may be unfamiliar to the clinician.
