861
Updated from DSM-5, DSM-5-TR includes an expanded version of the Outline and an approach
to assessment using the Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI), which has been field-tested
among clinicians, patients, and accompanying relatives and found to be a feasible, acceptable,
and useful cultural assessment tool.
The Outline for Cultural Formulation calls for systematic assessment of the following
categories:
Cultural identity of the individual: Describe the individual’s demographic (e.g., age, gender, ethnoracial background) or
other socially and culturally defined characteristics that may influence interpersonal relationships, access to resources, and
developmental and current challenges, conflicts, or predicaments. Other clinically relevant aspects of identity may include
religious affiliation and spirituality, socioeconomic class, caste, personal and family places of birth and growing up, migrant
status, occupation, and sexual orientation, among others. Note which aspects of identity are prioritized by the individual and
how they interact (intersectionality), which may reflect the influence of clinical setting and health concerns. For migrants,
the degree and kinds of involvement with both the cultural contexts of origin and the new cultural contexts should be noted.
Similarly, for individuals who identify with racialized and ethnic groups, the degree of interaction and identification with
their own group and other segments of society should be noted. Language abilities, preferences, and patterns of use are
relevant for identifying difficulties with access to care, social integration, and clinical communication or the need for an
interpreter.
Cultural concepts of distress: Describe the cultural constructs that influence how the individual experiences, understands,
and communicates his or her symptoms or problems to others. These constructs include cultural idioms of distress, cultural
explanations or perceived causes, and cultural syndromes. The level of severity and meaning of the distressing experiences
should be assessed in relation to the norms of the individual’s cultural background. Priority symptoms, perceived
seriousness of the illness, the level of associated stigma, and anticipated outcomes are all relevant. Elicit the individual’s and
family’s or friends’ help-seeking expectations and plans, as well as patterns of self-coping and their connection to the
individual’s cultural concepts of distress, including past help-seeking experiences. Assessment of coping and help-seeking
patterns should consider the use of professional as well as traditional, alternative, or complementary sources of care.
Psychosocial stressors and cultural features of vulnerability and resilience: Identify key stressors, challenges, and
supports in the individual’s social environment (which may include both local and distant events). These include social
determinants of the individual’s mental health such as access to resources (e.g., housing, transportation) and opportunities
(e.g., education, employment); exposure to racism, discrimination, and systemic institutional stigmatization; and social
marginalization or exclusion (structural violence). Also assess the role of religion, family, and other interpersonal
relationships and social networks (e.g., friends, neighbors, coworkers, online forums or groups) in causing stress or
providing emotional, instrumental, and informational support. Social stressors and social supports vary with social context,
family structure, developmental tasks, and the cultural meaning of events. Levels of functioning, disability, and resilience
should be assessed in light of the individual’s cultural background.
Cultural features of the relationship between the individual and the clinician, treatment team, and institution:
Identify differences in cultural background, language, education, and social status among other aspects of identity between
an individual and clinician (or the treatment team and institution) that may cause difficulties in communication and may
influence diagnosis and treatment. Considering the ways that individuals
862
and clinicians are positioned socially and perceive each other in terms of social categories may influence the assessment
