process. Experiences of racism and discrimination in the larger society may impede establishing trust and safety in the
clinical diagnostic encounter. Effects may include problems eliciting symptoms, misunderstanding of the cultural and
clinical significance of symptoms and behaviors, and difficulty establishing or maintaining the rapport needed for accurate
assessment and an effective clinical alliance.
Overall cultural assessment: Summarize the implications of the components of the cultural formulation identified in earlier
sections of the Outline for the differential diagnosis of mental disorders and other clinically relevant issues or problems, as
well as appropriate management and treatment intervention.
Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI)
The Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI) is a set of protocols that clinicians may use to obtain
information during a mental health assessment about the impact of culture on key aspects of an
individual’s clinical presentation and care. The CFI consists of three components: the core CFI, a
set of 16 questions that can be used to obtain an initial assessment from any individual; an
Informant version of the core CFI to obtain collateral information; and a set of Supplementary
modules to expand the evaluation as needed. In the CFI, the term culture includes:
The processes through which individuals assign meaning to experience, drawing from the values, orientations, knowledge,
and practices of the diverse social groups (e.g., ethnic groups, faith groups, occupational groups, veterans’ groups) and
communities in which they participate.
Aspects of individuals’ background, developmental experiences, and current social contexts and position that affect their
perspective, such as age, gender, social class, geographic origin, migration, language, religion, sexual orientation, disability,
or ethnic or racialized background.
The influence of family, friends, and other community members (particularly, the individual’s social network) on the
individual’s illness experience.
The cultural background of the health care providers and the values and assumptions embedded in the organization and
practices of health care systems and institutions that may affect the clinical interaction.
Cultural processes involve interactions of the individual with local and larger social contexts.
A cultural assessment thus evaluates processes both within the individual and in the social world,
assessing the context as much as the person.
The CFI is a brief semistructured interview for systematically assessing cultural factors
relevant to the care of any individual. The CFI focuses on the individual’s experience and the
social contexts of the clinical problem, symptoms, or concerns. The CFI follows a person-
centered approach to cultural assessment by eliciting information from the individual about his
or her own views and those of others in his or her social network. This approach is designed to
avoid stereotyping, in that each individual’s cultural knowledge affects how he or she interprets
illness experience and guides how he or she seeks help. Because the CFI concerns the
individual’s personal views, there are no right or wrong answers to these questions. The core CFI
(and informant version) is included later in this chapter and is available online at
www.psychiatry.org/dsm5; the Supplementary modules are also available online.
863
The core CFI (and informant version) is formatted as two text columns. The left-hand
