column contains the instructions for administering the CFI and describes the goals for each
interview domain. The questions in the right-hand column illustrate how to explore these
domains, but they are not meant to be exhaustive. Follow-up questions may be needed to clarify
individuals’ answers. Questions may be rephrased as needed. The CFI is intended as a guide to
cultural assessment and should be used flexibly to maintain a natural flow of the interview and
rapport with the individual.
The CFI is best used in conjunction with demographic information obtained before the
interview in order to tailor the CFI questions to address the individual’s background and current
situation. Specific demographic domains to be explored with the CFI will vary across individuals
and settings. A comprehensive assessment may include place of birth, age, gender, ethnic or
racialized background, marital status, family composition, education, language fluencies, sexual
orientation, religious or spiritual affiliation, occupation, employment, income, and migration
history.
The CFI can be used in the initial assessment of individuals at any age, in any clinical setting,
regardless of the cultural background of the individual or of the clinician. Individuals and
clinicians who appear to share the same cultural background may nevertheless differ in ways that
are relevant to care. The CFI may be used in its entirety, or components may be incorporated into
a clinical evaluation as needed. The CFI may be especially helpful in clinical practice when any
of the following occur:
Difficulty in diagnostic assessment owing to significant differences in the cultural, religious, or socioeconomic backgrounds
of clinician and the individual.
Uncertainty about the fit between culturally distinctive symptoms and diagnostic criteria.
Difficulty in judging illness severity or impairment.
Divergent views of symptoms or expectations of care based on previous experience with other cultural systems of healing
and health care.
Disagreement between the individual and clinician on the course of care.
Potential mistrust of mainstream services and institutions by individuals with collective histories of trauma and oppression.
Limited engagement in and adherence to treatment by the individual.
The core CFI emphasizes four domains of assessment: Cultural Definition of the Problem
(questions 1–3); Cultural Perceptions of Cause, Context, and Support (questions 4–10); Cultural
Factors Affecting Self-Coping and Past Help Seeking (questions 11–13); and Cultural Factors
Affecting Current Help Seeking (questions 14–16). Both the person-centered process of
conducting the CFI and the information it elicits are intended to enhance the cultural validity of
diagnostic assessment, facilitate treatment planning, and promote the individual’s engagement
and satisfaction. To achieve these goals, the clinician should integrate the information obtained
from the CFI with all other available clinical material into a comprehensive clinical and
contextual evaluation. An Informant version of the CFI can be used to collect collateral
information on the CFI domains from family members or caregivers.
Supplementary modules have been developed that expand on each domain of the core CFI
and guide clinicians who wish to explore these domains in greater depth. Supplementary
modules have also been developed for specific populations, such as children and adolescents,
elderly individuals, caregivers, and immigrants and refugees. These supplementary modules are
