21
Use of the Manual
This text is designed to provide a practical guide to using DSM-5, particularly in clinical
practice.
Approach to Clinical Case Formulation
The primary purpose of DSM-5 is to assist trained clinicians in the diagnosis of mental disorders
as part of a case formulation assessment that leads to an informed treatment plan for each
individual. The case formulation for any given individual should involve a careful clinical
history and concise summary of the social, psychological, and biological factors that may have
contributed to developing a given mental disorder. It is not sufficient to simply check off the
symptoms in the diagnostic criteria to make a mental disorder diagnosis. A thorough evaluation
of these criteria may assure more reliable assessment (which may be aided by the use of
dimensional symptom severity assessment tools); the relative severity and salience of an
individual’s signs and symptoms and their contribution to a diagnosis will ultimately require
clinical judgment. Diagnosis requires clinical training to recognize when the combination of
predisposing, precipitating, perpetuating, and protective factors has resulted in a
psychopathological condition in which the signs and symptoms exceed normal ranges. The
ultimate goal of a clinical case formulation is to use the available contextual and diagnostic
information in developing a comprehensive treatment plan that is informed by the individual’s
cultural and social context. However, recommendations for the selection and use of the most
appropriate evidence-based treatment options for each disorder are beyond the scope of this
manual.
Elements of a Diagnosis
Diagnostic criteria are offered as guidelines for making diagnoses, and their use should be
informed by clinical judgment. Text descriptions, including introductory sections of each
diagnostic chapter, can help support diagnosis (e.g., describing the criteria more fully under
“Diagnostic Features”; providing differential diagnoses).
Following the assessment of diagnostic criteria, clinicians should consider the application of
disorder subtypes and/or specifiers as appropriate. Most specifiers are only applicable to the
current presentation and may change over the course of the disorder (e.g., with good to fair
insight; predominantly inattentive presentation; in a controlled environment) and can be given
only if full criteria for the disorder are currently met. Other specifiers are indicative of the
lifetime course (e.g., with seasonal pattern, bipolar type in schizoaffective disorder) and can be
assigned regardless of current status.
