other supports (e.g., from co-workers, from participation in
religion or spirituality).
Focus on stressful aspects of the individual’s environment. Can
also probe, e.g., relationship problems, difficulties at work or
school, or discrimination.
 7. Are there any kinds of stresses that make your [PROBLEM]
worse, such as difficulties with money, or family problems?
ROLE OF CULTURAL IDENTITY
(Cultural Identity, Psychosocial Stressors, Religion and Spirituality, Immigrants and Refugees, Older Adults, Children and
Adolescents)
Sometimes, aspects of people’s background or identity can
make their [PROBLEM] better or worse. By background or
identity, I mean, for example, the communities you belong
to, the languages you speak, where you or your family are
from, your race or ethnic background, your gender or sexual
orientation, or your faith or religion.
Ask the individual to reflect on the most salient elements of his
or her cultural identity. Use this information to tailor
questions 9–10 as needed.
 8. For you, what are the most important aspects of your
background or identity?
Elicit aspects of identity that make the problem better or worse.  9. Are there any aspects of your background or identity that
make a difference to your [PROBLEM]?
Probe as needed (e.g., clinical worsening as a result of
discrimination due to migration status, race/ethnicity, or
sexual orientation).
Probe as needed (e.g., migration-related problems; conflict
across generations or due to gender roles).
10. Are there any aspects of your background or identity that
are causing other concerns or difficulties for you?
CULTURAL FACTORS AFFECTING SELF-COPING AND PAST HELP SEEKING
SELF-COPING
(Coping and Help Seeking, Religion and Spirituality, Older Adults, Caregivers, Psychosocial Stressors)
Clarify self-coping for the problem.
11. Sometimes people have various ways of dealing with
problems like [PROBLEM]. What have you done on your
own to cope with your [PROBLEM]?
866
PAST HELP SEEKING
(Coping and Help Seeking, Religion and Spirituality, Older Adults, Caregivers, Psychosocial Stressors, Immigrants and
Refugees, Social Network, Clinician-Patient Relationship)
Elicit various sources of help (e.g., medical care, mental health
treatment, support groups, work-based counseling, folk
healing, religious or spiritual counseling, other forms of
traditional or alternative healing).
12. Often, people look for help from many different sources,
including different kinds of doctors, helpers, or healers. In
the past, what kinds of treatment, help, advice, or healing
have you sought for your [PROBLEM]?
Probe as needed (e.g., “What other sources of help have you
used?”).
PROBE IF DOES NOT DESCRIBE USEFULNESS OF HELP
RECEIVED:
Clarify the individual’s experience and regard for previous
help.
What types of help or treatment were most useful? Not useful?
BARRIERS
(Coping and Help Seeking, Religion and Spirituality, Older Adults, Psychosocial Stressors, Immigrants and Refugees, Social
Network, Clinician-Patient Relationship)
Clarify the role of social barriers to help seeking, access to
care, and problems engaging in previous treatment.
Probe details as needed (e.g., “What got in the way?”).
13. Has anything prevented you from getting the help you
need?
PROBE AS NEEDED:
For example, money, work or family commitments, stigma or
discrimination, or lack of services that understand your
