language or background?
CULTURAL FACTORS AFFECTING CURRENT HELP SEEKING
PREFERENCES
(Social Network, Caregivers, Religion and Spirituality, Older Adults, Coping and Help Seeking)
Clarify individual’s current perceived needs and expectations
of help, broadly defined.
Now let’s talk some more about the help you need.
Probe if individual lists only one source of help (e.g., “What
other kinds of help would be useful to you at this time?”).
14. What kinds of help do you think would be most useful to
you at this time for your [PROBLEM]?
Focus on the views of the social network regarding help
seeking.
15. Are there other kinds of help that your family, friends, or
other people have suggested would be helpful for you now?
867
CLINICIAN-PATIENT RELATIONSHIP
(Clinician-Patient Relationship, Older Adults)
Elicit possible concerns about the clinic or the clinician-patient
relationship, including perceived racism, language barriers,
or cultural differences that may undermine goodwill,
communication, or care delivery.
Sometimes doctors and patients misunderstand each other
because they come from different backgrounds or have
different expectations.
Probe details as needed (e.g., “In what way?”).
Address possible barriers to care or concerns about the clinic
and the clinician-patient relationship raised previously.
16. Have you been concerned about this and is there anything
that we can do to provide you with the care you need?
868
Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI)—Informant Version
The CFI Informant Version collects collateral information from an informant who is
knowledgeable about the clinical problems and life circumstances of the identified individual.
This version can be used to supplement information obtained from the core CFI or can be used
instead of the core CFI when the individual is unable to provide information (e.g., children or
adolescents, individuals with florid psychosis, individuals with cognitive impairment).
Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI)—Informant Version
GUIDE TO INTERVIEWER
INSTRUCTIONS TO THE INTERVIEWER ARE
ITALICIZED.
The following questions aim to clarify key aspects of the
presenting clinical problem from the informant’s point of
view. This includes the problem’s meaning, potential sources
of help, and expectations for services.
INTRODUCTION FOR THE INFORMANT:
I would like to understand the problems that bring your family
member/friend here so that I can help you and him/her more
effectively. I want to know about your experience and ideas.
I will ask some questions about what is going on and how
you and your family member/friend are dealing with it. There
are no right or wrong answers.
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE PATIENT
Clarify the informant’s relationship with the individual and/or
the individual’s family.
1. How would you describe your relationship to [INDIVIDUAL
OR TO FAMILY]?
PROBE IF NOT CLEAR:
How often do you see [INDIVIDUAL]?
