Cultural Concepts of Distress
Relevance for Diagnostic Assessment
The term cultural concepts of distress refers to ways that individuals experience, understand, and
communicate suffering, behavioral problems, or troubling thoughts and emotions. Three main
types of cultural concepts of distress may be distinguished. Cultural idioms of distress are ways
of expressing distress that may not involve specific symptoms or syndromes, but that provide
collective, shared ways of experiencing and talking about personal or social concerns. For
example, everyday talk about “nerves” or “depression” may refer to widely varying forms of
suffering without mapping onto a discrete set of symptoms, syndrome, or disorder. Cultural
explanations or perceived causes are labels, attributions, or features of an explanatory model that
indicate culturally recognized meaning or etiology for symptoms, illness, or distress. Cultural
syndromes are clusters of symptoms and attributions that tend to co-occur among individuals in
specific cultural groups, communities, or contexts and that are recognized locally as coherent
patterns of experience.
These three cultural concepts of distress—cultural idioms of distress, cultural explanations,
and cultural syndromes—are more relevant to clinical practice than the older formulation
culture-bound syndrome. Specifically, the term culture-bound syndrome ignores the fact that
clinically important cultural differences often involve explanations or experience of distress
rather than culturally distinctive configurations of symptoms. Furthermore, the term culture
bound overemphasizes the extent to which cultural concepts of distress are characterized by
highly idiosyncratic experiences that are restricted to specific geographic regions. The current
formulation acknowledges that all forms of distress are locally shaped, including the DSM
disorders. From this perspective, many DSM diagnoses can be understood as operationalized
prototypes that started out as cultural syndromes and became widely accepted as a result of their
clinical and research utility. Across groups there remain culturally patterned differences in
symptoms, ways of talking about distress, and locally perceived causes, which in turn are
associated with coping strategies and patterns of help seeking.
Cultural concepts of distress arise from local “folk” or professional diagnostic systems for
mental and emotional distress, and they may also reflect the influence of
872
biomedical concepts. Cultural concepts of distress have four key features in relation to the
DSM-5 nosology:
There is seldom a one-to-one correspondence of any cultural concept of distress with a DSM diagnostic entity; the
correspondence is more likely to be one-to-many in either direction. Symptoms or behaviors that might be sorted by DSM-5
into several disorders may be included in a single cultural concept of distress, and diverse presentations that might be
classified by DSM-5 as variants of a single disorder may be sorted into several distinct concepts by an indigenous diagnostic
system.
Cultural concepts of distress may apply to a wide range of symptom and functional severity, including presentations that do
not meet DSM criteria for any mental disorder. For example, an individual with acute grief or a social predicament may use
