the same idiom of distress or display the same cultural syndrome as another individual with more severe psychopathology.
In common usage, the same cultural term frequently denotes more than one type of cultural concept of distress. A familiar
example may be the concept of “depression,” which may be used to describe a syndrome (e.g., major depressive disorder),
an idiom of distress (e.g., as in the common expression “I feel depressed”), or an explanation or perceived cause (e.g., “the
baby was born with emotional problems because his mother suffered from depression during her pregnancy”).
Like culture and DSM itself, cultural concepts of distress may change over time in response to both local and global
influences.
Cultural concepts of distress are important to psychiatric diagnosis for several reasons:
To enhance identification of individuals’ concerns and detection of psychopathology: Referring to cultural concepts of
distress in screening instruments or in reviews of systems may facilitate identification of individuals’ concerns and enhance
detection of psychopathology, as individuals may be more familiar with these cultural concepts of distress than with
professional terminology.
To avoid misdiagnosis: Cultural variation in symptoms and in explanatory models associated with these cultural concepts
of distress may lead clinicians to misjudge the severity of a problem or assign the wrong diagnosis (e.g., socially warranted
suspicion may be misunderstood as paranoia; unfamiliar symptom presentations may be misdiagnosed as psychosis).
To obtain useful clinical information: Cultural variations in symptoms and attributions may be associated with particular
features of risk, resilience, and outcome. Clinical exploration of cultural concepts of distress can elicit information on the
role that specific contexts play in symptom development and course and in their response to coping strategies.
To improve clinical rapport and engagement: “Speaking the language of the patient,” both linguistically and in terms of
his or her dominant cultural concepts of distress and metaphors, can result in greater communication and satisfaction,
facilitate treatment negotiation, and lead to higher retention and adherence.
To improve therapeutic efficacy: Culture influences the psychological mechanisms of a disorder, which need to be
understood and addressed to improve clinical efficacy. For example, culturally specific catastrophic cognitions can
contribute to symptom escalation into panic attacks.
To guide clinical research: Locally perceived connections between cultural concepts of distress may help identify patterns
of comorbidity and underlying biological substrates. Cultural concepts of distress, particularly cultural syndromes, may also
point to previously unrecognized disorders or variants that could be included in future
873
nosological revisions (e.g., in a change from DSM-IV, the concept of possession was added to the DSM-5 criteria for
dissociative identity disorder).
To clarify cultural epidemiology: Cultural concepts of distress are not endorsed uniformly by everyone in a given cultural
context. Distinguishing cultural idioms of distress, cultural explanations, and cultural syndromes provides an approach for
studying the distribution of cultural features of illness across settings and regions, and over time. It also suggests questions
about cultural determinants of risk, course, and outcome in clinical and community settings to enhance the evidence base of
cultural research.
DSM-5 includes information on cultural concepts of distress in order to improve the accuracy
of diagnosis and the comprehensiveness of clinical assessment. Clinical assessment of
individuals presenting with these cultural concepts of distress should determine whether their
presentation meets DSM-5 criteria for a specified disorder or instead is best classified as an other
