specified diagnosis. Once the disorder is diagnosed, the cultural terms and explanations should
be included in case formulations; they may help clarify symptoms and etiological attributions
that could otherwise be confusing. Individuals whose symptoms do not meet DSM criteria for a
specific mental disorder may still expect and require treatment; this should be assessed on a case-
by-case basis. In addition to the CFI and its informant and supplementary modules, DSM-5-TR
contains the following information and tools that may be useful when integrating cultural
information in clinical practice:
Data in updated DSM-5-TR text for specific disorders: The text includes information on cultural variations in symptom
expression; attributions for disorder causes or precipitants; factors associated with differential prevalence across
demographic groups; cultural norms that may affect the threshold for pathology and the perceived severity of the condition;
risk for misdiagnosis when evaluating individuals from socially oppressed ethnoracial or marginalized groups; associated
cultural concepts of distress; and other material relevant to culturally informed diagnosis. It is important to emphasize that
there is no one-to-one correspondence at the categorical level between DSM disorders and cultural concepts of distress.
Differential diagnosis for individuals must therefore incorporate information on cultural variation with information elicited
by the CFI.
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention: Some of the clinical concerns identified by the CFI may
correspond to one of the conditions or problems listed in the Section II chapter “Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of
Clinical Attention” (e.g., acculturation problems, parent-child relational problems, religious or spiritual problems), along
with the associated ICD-10-CM code.
Examples of Cultural Concepts of Distress
Clinicians need to familiarize themselves with individuals’ cultural concepts of distress to
understand individuals’ concerns and facilitate accurate diagnostic assessment; use of the
Cultural Formulation Interview may help in this regard. The following ten examples were
selected to illustrate some of the ways in which cultural concepts of distress may affect the
process of diagnosis. The principles illustrated with these examples can be applied to the myriad
other cultural concepts of distress found in specific cultural contexts.
The same term may be used for multiple types of cultural concepts of distress and clinical
presentations, depending on context. Potentially, cultural concepts of distress can occur on their
own or coexist with any psychiatric disorder and influence clinical presentation, course, and
outcome. For example, in U.S. Latinx communities, ataque de nervios can be comorbid with
nearly all psychiatric disorders.
Each of the following examples of cultural concepts of distress includes a description of
“Related conditions in DSM-5-TR” to highlight 1) the DSM-5 disorders that overlap
874
phenomenologically with the cultural concept of distress (e.g., panic disorder and ataque de
nervios, due to their paroxysmic nature and symptom similarity) and 2) the DSM-5 disorders that
are frequently attributed to the causal explanation or idiom (e.g., PTSD and kufungisisa).
Ataque de nervios
Ataque de nervios (“attack of nerves”) is a syndrome found in Latinx cultural contexts,
