Related conditions in other cultural contexts.
Related conditions in DSM-5-TR.
characterized by symptoms of intense emotional upset, including acute anxiety, anger, or grief;
screaming and shouting uncontrollably; attacks of crying; trembling; heat in the chest rising into
the head; and becoming verbally and physically aggressive. Dissociative experiences (e.g.,
depersonalization, derealization, amnesia), seizure-like or fainting episodes, and suicidal
behavior are prominent in some ataques but absent in others. A general feature of an ataque de
nervios is a sense of being out of control. Attacks frequently occur as a direct result of a stressful
event relating to the family, such as news of the death of a close relative, conflicts with a spouse
or children, or witnessing an accident involving a family member. For a minority of individuals,
no particular social or interpersonal event triggers their ataques; instead, their vulnerability to
losing control comes from the accumulated experience of suffering.
No one-to-one relationship has been found between ataque and any specific psychiatric
disorder, although several disorders, including panic disorder, other specified or unspecified
dissociative disorder, and functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder), have
symptomatic overlap with ataque.
In community samples, ataque is reported among U.S. Latinx by 7%–15% of adults and 4%–
9% of youth, depending on region and Latinx subgroup. It is associated with suicidal thoughts,
disability, and outpatient psychiatric utilization, after adjustment for psychiatric diagnoses,
traumatic exposure, and other covariates. However, some ataques represent normative
expressions of acute distress (e.g., at a funeral) without clinical sequelae. The term ataque de
nervios may also refer to an idiom of distress that includes any “fit”-like paroxysm of
emotionality (e.g., hysterical laughing) and may be used to indicate an episode of loss of control
in response to an intense stressor.
Indisposition in Haiti, blacking out in several West
Indies and Caribbean countries, and falling out in the Southern United States. This use of the
terms blacking out or falling out should not be confused with alcohol- or other substance-induced
blackouts or amnesia.
Panic attack, panic disorder, other specified or unspecified
dissociative disorder, functional neurological symptom disorder, intermittent explosive disorder,
other specified or unspecified anxiety disorder, other specified or unspecified trauma- and
stressor-related disorder.
Dhat syndrome
Dhat syndrome is a term that was coined in South Asia little more than half a century ago to
account for common clinical presentations of young men who attributed their various symptoms
to semen loss. Despite the name, it is not a discrete syndrome but rather a cultural explanation of
distress for individuals who refer to diverse symptoms, such as anxiety, fatigue, weakness,
weight loss, erectile dysfunction, other multiple somatic complaints, and depressed mood. The
cardinal feature is anxiety and distress about the loss of dhat in the absence of any identifiable
physiological dysfunction. Dhat was identified by individuals as a white discharge that was
noted on defecation or urination. Ideas about this substance are related to the concept of dhatu
(semen) described in the Hindu system of medicine, Ayurveda, as one of seven essential bodily
fluids whose balance is necessary to maintain health.
875
