Related conditions in other cultural contexts.
Related conditions in DSM-5-TR.
Related conditions in other cultural contexts.
Related conditions in DSM-5-TR.
Although dhat syndrome was formulated as a clinical category to help inform local clinical
practice, related ideas about the harmful effects of semen loss have been shown to be widespread
in the general population, suggesting a cultural disposition for explaining health problems and
symptoms with reference to dhat-related concepts. Research in health care settings has yielded
diverse estimates of the prevalence of dhat syndrome (e.g., 64% of men attending psychiatric
clinics in India for sexual complaints; 30% of men attending general medical clinics in Pakistan).
Although dhat syndrome is most commonly identified with young men from lower
socioeconomic backgrounds, middle-age men may also be affected. Comparable concerns about
white vaginal discharge (leukorrhea) have been associated with a variant of the concept for
women. The term dhat may also be used as an idiom and causal explanation for sexually
transmitted infections (e.g., gonorrhea, chlamydia), in the absence of psychological distress.
Koro in Southeast Asia, particularly Singapore, and
shen-k’uei (“kidney deficiency”) in China.
Major depressive disorder, persistent depressive disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, somatic symptom disorder, illness anxiety disorder, erectile
disorder, early (premature) ejaculation, other specified or unspecified sexual dysfunction,
educational problems.
Hikikomori
Hikikomori (a Japanese term composed of hiku [to pull back] and moru [to seclude oneself]) is a
syndrome of protracted and severe social withdrawal observed in Japan that may result in
complete cessation of in-person interactions with others. The typical picture in hikikomori is an
adolescent or young adult male who does not leave his room within his parents’ home and has no
in-person social interactions. This behavior may initially be ego-syntonic but usually leads to
distress over time; it is often associated with high intensity of Internet use and virtual social
exchanges. Other features include no interest or willingness to attend school or work. The 2010
guideline of the Japan Ministry of Health, Labor, and Welfare requires 6 months of social
withdrawal for a diagnosis of hikikomori. The extreme social withdrawal seen in hikikomori may
occur in the context of an established DSM-5 disorder (“secondary”) or manifest independently
(“primary”).
Protracted social withdrawal among adolescents and
young adults has been reported in many settings, including Australia, Bangladesh, Brazil, China,
France, India, Iran, Italy, Oman, South Korea, Spain, Taiwan, Thailand, and the United States.
Individuals with hikikomori-type behaviors in Japan, India, South Korea, and the United States
tend to display high levels of loneliness, limited social networks, and moderate functional
impairment.
Social anxiety disorder, major depressive disorder, generalized
anxiety disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, autism spectrum disorder, schizoid personality
disorder, avoidant personality disorder, schizophrenia or other psychotic disorder. The condition
may also be associated with Internet gaming disorder and, in adolescents, with school refusal.
Khyâl cap
“Khyâl attacks” (khyâl cap), or “wind attacks,” is a syndrome found in Cambodian cultural
