When the symptom presentation does not meet full criteria for any disorder and the
symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning, the “other specified” or “unspecified” category corresponding to
the predominant symptoms should be considered.
22
Subtypes and Specifiers
Subtypes and specifiers are provided for increased diagnostic specificity. Subtypes define
mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive phenomenological subgroupings within a diagnosis
and are indicated by the instruction “Specify whether” in the criteria set (e.g., in anorexia
nervosa, Specify whether restricting type or binge-eating/purging type). In contrast, specifiers are
not intended to be mutually exclusive or jointly exhaustive, and as a consequence, more than one
specifier may be applied to a given diagnosis. Specifiers (as opposed to subtypes) are indicated
by the instruction “Specify” or “Specify if” in the criteria set (e.g., in social anxiety disorder,
“Specify if: performance only”). Specifiers and subtypes provide an opportunity to define a more
homogeneous subgrouping of individuals with the disorder who share certain features (e.g.,
major depressive disorder, with mixed features) and to convey information that is relevant to the
management of the individual’s disorder, such as the “with other medical comorbidity” specifier
in sleep-wake disorders. Although the fifth character within an ICD-10-CM code is sometimes
designated to indicate a particular subtype or specifier (e.g., “0” in the fifth character in the
F02.80 diagnostic code for major neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, to indicate
the absence of a behavioral disturbance versus a “1” in the fifth character of the F02.81
diagnostic code for major neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease to indicate the
presence of a behavioral disturbance), the majority of subtypes and specifiers included in DSM-
5-TR are not reflected in the ICD-10-CM code and are indicated instead by recording the
subtype or specifier after the name of the disorder (e.g., social anxiety disorder, performance
type).
Use of Other Specified and Unspecified Mental Disorders
Although decades of scientific effort have gone into developing the diagnostic criteria sets for
the disorders included in Section II, it is well recognized that this set of categorical diagnoses
does not fully describe the full range of mental disorders that individuals experience and present
to clinicians on a daily basis throughout the world. Hence, it is also necessary to include “other
specified” or “unspecified” disorder options for presentations that do not fit exactly into the
diagnostic boundaries of disorders in each chapter. Moreover, there are settings (e.g., emergency
department) where it may only be possible to identify the most prominent symptom expressions
associated with a particular chapter (e.g., delusions, hallucinations, mania, depression, anxiety,
substance intoxication, neurocognitive symptoms). In such cases, it may be most appropriate to
assign the corresponding “unspecified” disorder as a placeholder until a more complete
differential diagnosis is possible.
DSM-5 provides two diagnostic options for presentations that do not meet the diagnostic
criteria for any of the specific DSM-5 disorders: other specified disorder and unspecified
disorder. The other specified category is provided to allow the clinician to communicate the
