Related conditions in other cultural contexts.
Related conditions in DSM-5-TR.
Related conditions in other cultural contexts.
contexts. Common symptoms include those of panic attacks, such as dizziness, palpitations,
shortness of breath, and cold extremities, as well as other symptoms of anxiety and autonomic
arousal (e.g., tinnitus and neck soreness). Khyâl attacks include catastrophic cognitions centered
on the concern that khyâl (a windlike substance) may rise in the body—along with blood—and
cause a range of serious effects (e.g., compressing the lungs to cause
876
shortness of breath and asphyxia; entering the cranium to cause tinnitus, dizziness, blurry vision,
and a fatal syncope). Khyâl attacks may occur without warning but are frequently brought about
by triggers such as worrisome thoughts, standing up (i.e., orthostasis), specific odors with
negative associations, and agoraphobic-type cues like going to crowded spaces or riding in a car.
Khyâl attacks usually meet panic attack criteria and may shape the experience of other anxiety
and trauma- and stressor-related disorders. Khyâl attacks may be associated with considerable
disability.
Pen lom in Laos, srog rlung gi nad in Tibet, vata in Sri
Lanka, and hwa byung in Korea.
Panic attack, panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder,
agoraphobia, posttraumatic stress disorder, illness anxiety disorder.
Kufungisisa
Kufungisisa (“thinking too much” in Shona) is an idiom of distress and a cultural explanation
among the Shona of Zimbabwe. As an explanation, it is considered to be causative of anxiety,
depression, and somatic problems (e.g., “My heart is painful because I think too much”). As an
idiom of psychosocial distress, it is indicative of interpersonal and social difficulties (e.g., marital
problems, having no money to take care of children, unemployment). Kufungisisa involves
ruminating on upsetting thoughts, particularly worries, including concerns about chronic physical
illness, such as HIV-related disorders.
Kufungisisa is associated with a range of psychopathology, including anxiety symptoms,
excessive worry, panic attacks, depressive symptoms, irritability, and posttraumatic stress
disorder. In a study of a random community sample, two-thirds of the cases identified by a
general psychopathology measure included this complaint.
“Thinking too much” is a common idiom of distress
and cultural explanation across many countries and ethnic groups; despite some commonalities
across global regions, “thinking too much” shows important heterogeneity across and within
cultural contexts. It has been described in Africa, Asia, the Caribbean and Latin America, the
Middle East, and among indigenous groups. “Thinking too much” may also be a key component
of cultural syndromes such as “brain fag” in Nigeria. In the case of “brain fag,” “thinking too
much” is primarily attributed to excessive study, which is considered to damage the brain in
particular, with symptoms including feelings of heat or crawling sensations in the head.
Cross-culturally, “thinking too much” typically references ruminative, intrusive, and/or
anxious thoughts—sometimes focused on a singular concern or past trauma and other times
based on numerous current worries. In some contexts, it is thought to lead to more severe
disorder-like psychosis, suicidal thoughts, or even death.
