Related conditions in DSM-5-TR.
Related conditions in other cultural contexts.
Related conditions in DSM-5-TR.
Major depressive disorder, persistent depressive disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder,
prolonged grief disorder.
Maladi dyab
Maladi dyab or maladi satan (literally “devil/Satan illness,” also referred to as “sent sickness”) is
a cultural explanation in Haitian communities for diverse medical and psychiatric disorders, or
other negative experiences and problems in functioning. In this explanatory model, interpersonal
envy and malice cause people to harm their enemies by having sorcerers send illnesses such as
psychosis, depression, social or academic failure, and inability to perform activities of daily
living. These sicknesses have various names (e.g., ekspedisyon, mòvè zespri, kout poud) based on
how they are “sent”. This etiological explanation assumes that illness may be caused by others’
envy and hatred, provoked by the
877
victim’s economic success as evidenced by a new job or expensive purchase. One person’s gain
is assumed to produce another person’s loss, so visible success makes an individual vulnerable to
attack. Assigning the label of “sent sickness” depends more on mode of onset, social status, and
form of treatment that proves successful than on presenting symptoms. A wide range of
psychiatric disorders can be attributed to this cultural explanation. The acute onset of new
symptoms or an abrupt behavioral change raises suspicions of a spiritual attack. An individual
who is attractive, intelligent, or wealthy is perceived as especially vulnerable, and even young
healthy children are at risk.
Concerns about illness (typically, physical illness)
caused by envy or social conflict are common across cultural contexts and often expressed in the
form of “evil eye” (e.g., in Spanish, mal de ojo; in Italian, mal’occhiu).
Subsyndromal affliction (e.g., problems related to the social
environment, educational problems), in addition to a wide range of psychiatric disorders; the
cultural explanation of supernatural forces may lead to misdiagnosis of delusional disorder,
persecutory type; or schizophrenia.
Nervios
Nervios (“nerves”) is a common cultural idiom of distress and causal explanation in Latinx
cultural contexts in the United States and Latin America. Nervios refers to a general state of
vulnerability to stressful life experiences and to difficult life circumstances. The term nervios
includes a wide range of symptoms of emotional distress, somatic disturbance, and inability to
function. The most common symptoms attributed to nervios include headaches and “brain aches”
(occipital neck tension), irritability, gastrointestinal disturbances, sleep difficulties, nervousness,
easy tearfulness, inability to concentrate, trembling, tingling sensations, and mareos (dizziness
with occasional vertigo-like exacerbations). Nervios is a broad cultural idiom of distress that
spans the range of severity from cases with no mental disorder to presentations resembling
adjustment, anxiety, depressive, dissociative, somatic symptom, or psychotic disorders. The term
can also refer to a cultural explanation for multiple forms of psychological distress, especially
