Related conditions in other cultural contexts.
Related conditions in DSM-5-TR.
those involving weakness, enervation, and anxiety. Nervios may indicate a range of conditions,
which show regional variation, related to the nervous system (literally, the anatomical nerves). In
Puerto Rican communities, for example, nervios includes conditions such as “being nervous
since childhood,” which appears to be more of a trait and may precede social anxiety disorder,
and “being ill with nerves,” which is more related than other forms of nervios to psychiatric
problems, especially dissociation and depression.
Nevra among Greeks in North America, nierbi among
Sicilians in North America, and “nerves” among Whites in Appalachia and Newfoundland.
“Tension” is a related idiom and causal explanation among South Asian popul ations.
Major depressive disorder, persistent depressive disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder, other specified or unspecified dissociative
disorder, somatic symptom disorder, schizophrenia.
Shenjing shuairuo
Shenjing shuairuo (“weakness of the nervous system” in Mandarin Chinese) is a cultural
syndrome that integrates conceptual categories of Traditional Chinese Medicine with the
Western construct of neurasthenia. In the second, revised edition of the Chinese Classification of
Mental Disorders (CCMD-2-R), shenjing shuairuo was defined as a syndrome composed of
three out of five symptom clusters: weakness (e.g., mental fatigue), emotions (e.g., feeling
vexed), excitement (e.g., increased recollections), nervous pain (e.g., headache),
878
and sleep (e.g., insomnia). Fan nao (feeling vexed) is a form of irritability mixed with worry and
distress over conflicting thoughts and unfulfilled desires. The third edition of the CCMD retained
shenjing shuairuo as a somatoform diagnosis of exclusion. However, China adopted the ICD-10
as its official classification system in 2011, displacing the CCMD; although ICD-10 included
neurasthenia as a diagnostic category, ICD-11 does not. The use of shenjing shuairuo has
decreased substantially in recent years and appears to have been replaced by idioms of
depression and anxiety, at least in urban areas; among mental health clinicians, shenjing
shuairuo may largely be invoked in interactions with traditional patients to facilitate
communication and limit the stigma associated with psychiatric diagnoses.
Salient precipitants of shenjing shuairuo include work or family-related stressors, loss of face
(mianzi, lianzi), and an acute sense of failure (e.g., in academic performance). Shenjing shuairuo
is related to traditional concepts of weakness (xu) and health imbalances related to deficiencies
of a vital essence (e.g., the depletion of qi [vital energy] following overstraining or stagnation of
qi due to excessive worry). In the traditional interpretation, shenjing shuairuo results when
bodily channels (jing) conveying vital forces (shen) become dysregulated as a result of various
social and interpersonal stressors, such as the inability to change a chronically frustrating and
distressing situation. Various psychiatric disorders are associated with shenjing shuairuo, notably
mood, anxiety, and somatic symptom disorders. In medical clinics in China, however, up to 45%
of patients with shenjing shuairuo do not have symptoms that meet criteria for any DSM-IV
disorder.
