Related conditions in other cultural contexts.
Related conditions in DSM-5-TR.
Related conditions in other cultural contexts.
Related conditions in DSM-5-TR.
879
Neurasthenia-spectrum idioms and syndromes are
present in many cultural contexts, including India (ashaktapanna), Mongolia (yadargaa), and
Japan (shinkei-suijaku), among other settings. Other conditions, such as brain fag syndrome,
burnout syndrome, and chronic fatigue syndrome, are also closely related.
Major depressive disorder, persistent depressive disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, somatic symptom disorder, social anxiety disorder, specific phobia,
posttraumatic stress disorder.
Susto
Susto (“fright”) is a cultural explanation for distress and misfortune prevalent in some Latinx
cultural contexts in North, Central, and South America. It is not recognized as an illness category
among Latinx from the Caribbean. Susto is an illness attributed to a frightening event that causes
the soul to leave the body and results in unhappiness and sickness, as well as difficulties
functioning in key social roles. Symptoms may appear any time from days to years after the
fright is experienced. In extreme cases, susto may result in death. There are no specific defining
symptoms for susto; however, symptoms that are often reported by individuals with susto include
appetite disturbances; inadequate or excessive sleep; troubled sleep or dreams; feelings of
sadness, low self-worth, or dirtiness; interpersonal sensitivity; and lack of motivation to do
anything. Somatic symptoms accompanying susto may include muscle aches and pains, cold in
the extremities, pallor, headache, stomachache, and diarrhea. Precipitating events are diverse and
include natural phenomena, animals, interpersonal situations, and supernatural agents, among
others.
Three syndromic types of susto (referred to as cibih in the Zapotec language) have been
identified, each having different relationships with psychiatric diagnoses. An interpersonal susto
characterized by feelings of loss, abandonment, and not being loved by family, with
accompanying symptoms of sadness, poor self-image, and suicidal thoughts, seems to be closely
related to major depressive disorder. When susto results from a traumatic event that plays a
major role in shaping symptoms and in emotional processing of the experience, the diagnosis of
posttraumatic stress disorder appears more appropriate. Susto characterized by various recurrent
somatic symptoms—for which the individual seeks health care from several practitioners—is
thought to resemble a somatic symptom disorder.
Similar 
etiological 
concepts 
and 
symptom
configurations are found globally. In the Andean region, susto is referred to as espanto. Soul loss
conditions in South Asia and Southeast Asia also share features with susto. In soul loss,
individuals experiencing a fright are thought to temporarily lose their soul, a piece of their soul,
or one of many souls. This makes the individual vulnerable to other physical and psychological
forms of distress.
Major depressive disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, other
specified or unspecified trauma and stressor-related disorder, somatic symptom disorder.
Taijin kyofusho
