Related conditions in other cultural contexts.
Related conditions in DSM-5-TR.
Taijin kyofusho (“interpersonal fear disorder” in Japanese) is a syndrome found in Japanese
cultural contexts characterized by anxiety about and avoidance of interpersonal situations due to
the thought, feeling, or conviction that the individual’s appearance and actions in social
interactions are inadequate or offensive to others. Taijin kyofusho includes two culture-related
forms: a “sensitive type,” with extreme social sensitivity and anxiety about interpersonal
interactions, and an “offensive type,” in which the major concern is offending others. Variants
include major concerns about facial blushing (sekimen-kyofu), having an offensive body odor
(jiko-shu-kyofu), inappropriate gaze (too much or too little eye contact, jiko-shisen-kyofu), and
stiff or awkward facial expression or bodily movements (e.g., stiffening, trembling) or body
deformity (shubo-kyofu).
Taijin kyofusho is a broader construct than social anxiety disorder in DSM-5. Taijin kyofusho
also includes syndromes with features of body dysmorphic disorder, olfactory reference
syndrome, and delusional disorder; delusional disorder should be considered when concerns have
a delusional quality, responding poorly to simple reassurance or counterexample.
The distinctive symptoms of taijin kyofusho occur in
specific cultural contexts and, to some extent, with more severe social anxiety cross-culturally.
Similar syndromes are found in Korea (taein kong po) and other societies that place a strong
emphasis on the self-conscious maintenance of appropriate social behavior in hierarchical
interpersonal relationships. An interdependent self-construal, which emphasizes the relatedness
of self to a collective and the identification of self in terms of social roles and relationships, may
be a risk factor for taijin kyofusho symptoms across diverse cultures. The concern with offending
others through inappropriate social behavior, characteristic of offensive-type taijin kyofusho, has
also been described in several societies, including the United States, Australia, Indonesia, and
New Zealand.
Social anxiety disorder, body dysmorphic disorder, delusional
disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, olfactory reference syndrome (a type of other specified
obsessive-compulsive and related disorder). Olfactory reference syndrome is related specifically
to the jikoshu-kyofu variant of taijin kyofusho; this presentation is seen in various cultures outside
Japan.
880
