Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality
Disorders
Provided as an alternative to the extant personality disorders classification in
Section II, this hybrid dimensional-categorical model in Section III defines personality disorder
in terms of impairments in personality functioning and pathological personality traits. The
inclusion of both models of personality disorder diagnosis in DSM-5 reflects the decision of the
APA Board of Trustees to preserve continuity with current clinical practice, while also
introducing an alternative approach that aims to address numerous shortcomings of the approach
in Section II to personality disorders. For example, in the approach in Section II, symptoms
meeting criteria for a specific personality disorder frequently also meet criteria for other
personality disorders, and other specified or unspecified personality disorder is often the correct
(but mostly uninformative) diagnosis, in the sense that individuals do not tend to present with
patterns of symptoms that correspond with one and only one personality disorder.
In the following alternative DSM-5 model, personality disorders are characterized by
impairments in personality functioning and pathological personality traits. The specific
personality disorder diagnoses that may be derived from this model include antisocial, avoidant,
borderline, narcissistic, obsessive-compulsive, and schizotypal personality disorders. This
approach also includes a diagnosis of personality disorder—trait specified (PD-TS) that can be
made when a personality disorder is considered present but the criteria for a specific disorder are
not met.
General Criteria for Personality Disorder
General Criteria for Personality Disorder
The essential features of a personality disorder are
A. Moderate or greater impairment in personality (self/interpersonal) functioning.
B. One or more pathological personality traits.
C. The impairments in personality functioning and the individual’s personality trait
expression are relatively inflexible and pervasive across a broad range of
personal and social situations.
D. The impairments in personality functioning and the individual’s personality trait
expression are relatively stable across time, with onsets that can be traced back
to at least adolescence or early adulthood.
E. The impairments in personality functioning and the individual’s personality trait
