expression are not better explained by another mental disorder.
F. The impairments in personality functioning and the individual’s personality trait
expression are not solely attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
or another medical condition (e.g., severe head trauma).
G. The impairments in personality functioning and the individual’s personality trait
expression are not better understood as normal for an individual’s developmental
stage or sociocultural environment.
882
A diagnosis of a personality disorder requires two determinations: 1) an assessment of the
level of impairment in personality functioning, which is needed for Criterion A, and 2) an
evaluation of pathological personality traits, which is required for Criterion B. The impairments
in personality functioning and personality trait expression are relatively inflexible and pervasive
across a broad range of personal and social situations (Criterion C); relatively stable across time,
with onsets that can be traced back to at least adolescence or early adulthood (Criterion D); not
better explained by another mental disorder (Criterion E); not attributable to the physiological
effects of a substance or another medical condition (Criterion F); and not better understood as
normal for an individual’s developmental stage or sociocultural environment (Criterion G). All
Section III personality disorders described by criteria sets, as well as PD-TS, meet these general
criteria, by definition.
Criterion A: Level of Personality Functioning
Disturbances in self and interpersonal functioning constitute the core of personality
psychopathology, and in this alternative diagnostic model they are evaluated on a continuum.
Self functioning involves identity and self-direction; interpersonal functioning involves empathy
and intimacy (see Table 1). The Level of Personality Functioning Scale (LPFS; see Table 2, pp.
895–898) uses each of these elements to differentiate five levels of impairment, ranging from
little or no impairment (i.e., healthy, adaptive functioning; Level 0) to some (Level 1), moderate
(Level 2), severe (Level 3), and extreme (Level 4) impairment.
Impairment in personality functioning predicts the presence of a personality disorder, and the
severity of impairment predicts whether an individual has more than one personality disorder or
one of the more typically severe personality disorders. A moderate level of impairment in
personality functioning is required for the diagnosis of a personality disorder; this threshold is
based on empirical evidence that the moderate level of impairment maximizes the ability of
clinicians to accurately and efficiently identify personality disorder pathology.
Criterion B: Pathological Personality Traits
Pathological personality traits are organized into five broad domains: Negative Affectivity,
Detachment, Antagonism, Disinhibition, and Psychoticism. Within the five broad trait domains
are 25 specific trait facets that were developed initially from a review of existing trait models
and subsequently through iterative research with samples of persons who sought mental health
services. The full trait taxonomy is presented in Table 3 (see pp. 899–901). The B criteria for the
