specific personality disorders comprise subsets of the 25 trait facets, based on meta-analytic
reviews and empirical data on the relationships of the traits to DSM-IV personality disorder
diagnoses.
Criteria C and D: Pervasiveness and Stability
Impairments in personality functioning and pathological personality traits are relatively
pervasive across a range of personal and social contexts, as personality is defined as a pattern of
perceiving, relating to, and thinking about the environment and oneself. The term relatively
reflects the fact that all except the most extremely pathological personalities show some degree
of adaptability. The pattern in personality disorders is maladaptive and relatively inflexible,
which leads to disabilities in social, occupational, or other important pursuits, as individuals are
unable to modify their thinking or behavior, even in the face of evidence that their approach is
not working. The impairments in functioning and personality traits are also relatively stable.
Personality traits—the dispositions to behave or feel in certain ways—are more stable than the
symptomatic expressions of these dispositions, but personality traits can also change.
Impairments in personality functioning are more stable than symptoms.
883
TABLE 1 Elements of personality functioning
Self:
1. Identity: Experience of oneself as unique, with clear boundaries between self and others; stability of self-esteem and accuracy
of self-appraisal; capacity for, and ability to regulate, a range of emotional experience.
2. Self-direction: Pursuit of coherent and meaningful short-term and life goals; utilization of constructive and prosocial internal
standards of behavior; ability to self-reflect productively.
Interpersonal:
1. Empathy: Comprehension and appreciation of others’ experiences and motivations; tolerance of differing perspectives;
understanding of the effects of one’s own behavior on others.
2. Intimacy: Depth and duration of connection with others; desire and capacity for closeness; mutuality of regard reflected in
interpersonal behavior.
Criteria E, F, and G: Alternative Explanations for Personality Pathology
(Differential Diagnosis)
On some occasions, what appears to be a personality disorder may be better explained by another
mental disorder, the physiological effects of a substance or another medical condition, or a
normal developmental stage (e.g., adolescence, late life) or the individual’s sociocultural
environment. When another mental disorder is present, the diagnosis of a personality disorder is
not made if the manifestations of the personality disorder clearly are an expression of the other
mental disorder (e.g., if features of schizotypal personality disorder are present only in the
context of schizophrenia). On the other hand, personality disorders can be accurately diagnosed
in the presence of another mental disorder, such as major depressive disorder, and patients with
other mental disorders should be assessed for comorbid personality disorders because personality
disorders often impact the course of other mental disorders. Therefore, it is always appropriate to
assess personality functioning and pathological personality traits to provide a context for other
