psychopathology.
Specific Personality Disorders
Section III includes diagnostic criteria for antisocial, avoidant, borderline, narcissistic, obsessive-
compulsive, and schizotypal personality disorders. Each personality disorder is defined by
typical impairments in personality functioning (Criterion A) and characteristic pathological
personality traits (Criterion B):
Typical features of antisocial personality disorder are a failure to conform to lawful and ethical behavior, and an
egocentric, callous lack of concern for others, accompanied by deceitfulness, irresponsibility, manipulativeness, and/or risk
taking.
Typical features of avoidant personality disorder are avoidance of social situations and inhibition in interpersonal
relationships related to feelings of ineptitude and inadequacy, anxious preoccupation with negative evaluation and rejection,
and fears of ridicule or embarrassment.
Typical features of borderline personality disorder are instability of self-image, personal goals, interpersonal relationships,
and affects, accompanied by impulsivity, risk taking, and/or hostility.
Typical features of narcissistic personality disorder are variable and vulnerable self-esteem, with attempts at regulation
through attention and approval seeking, and either overt or covert grandiosity.
884
Typical features of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder are difficulties in establishing and sustaining close
relationships, associated with rigid perfectionism, inflexibility, and restricted emotional expression.
Typical features of schizotypal personality disorder are impairments in the capacity for social and close relationships, and
eccentricities in cognition, perception, and behavior that are associated with distorted self-image and incoherent personal
goals and accompanied by suspiciousness and restricted emotional expression.
The A and B criteria for the six specific personality disorders and for PD-TS follow. All
personality disorders also meet criteria C through G of the General Criteria for Personality
Disorder.
Antisocial Personality Disorder
Typical features of antisocial personality disorder are a failure to conform to lawful and ethical
behavior, and an egocentric, callous lack of concern for others, accompanied by deceitfulness,
irresponsibility, manipulativeness, and/or risk taking. Characteristic difficulties are apparent in
identity, self-direction, empathy, and/or intimacy, as described below, along with specific
maladaptive traits in the domains of Antagonism and Disinhibition.
Proposed Diagnostic Criteria
A. Moderate or greater impairment in personality functioning, manifested by
characteristic difficulties in two or more of the following four areas:
