specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for any specific category within a
diagnostic class. This is done by recording the name of the category, followed by the specific
reason. For example, with an individual with persistent hallucinations occurring in the absence of
any other psychotic symptoms (a presentation that does not meet criteria for any of the specific
disorders in the chapter “Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders”), the clinician
would record “other specified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder, with
persistent auditory hallucinations.” If the clinician chooses not to specify the reason that the
criteria are not met for a specific disorder, then “unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other
psychotic disorder” would be diagnosed. Note that the differentiation between other specified
and unspecified disorders is based on the clinician’s choice to indicate or not the reasons why the
presentation does not meet full criteria, providing maximum flexibility for diagnosis. When the
clinician determines that there is enough available clinical information to specify the nature of
the
23
presentation, the “other specified” diagnosis can be given. In those cases where the clinician
is not able to further specify the clinical presentation (e.g., in emergency room settings), the
“unspecified” diagnosis can be given. This is entirely a matter of clinical judgment.
It is a long-standing DSM convention for conditions included in the “Conditions for Further
Study” chapter in Section III to be listed as examples of presentations that can be specified using
the “other specified” designation. The inclusion of these conditions for further study as examples
does not represent endorsement by the American Psychiatric Association that these are valid
diagnostic categories.
Use of Clinical Judgment
DSM-5 is a classification of mental disorders that was developed for use in clinical, educational,
and research settings. The diagnostic categories, criteria, and textual descriptions are meant to be
employed by individuals with appropriate clinical training and experience in diagnosis. It is
important that DSM-5 not be applied mechanically by individuals without clinical training. The
specific diagnostic criteria included in DSM-5 are meant to serve as guidelines to be informed by
clinical judgment and are not meant to be used in a rigid cookbook fashion. For example, the
exercise of clinical judgment may justify giving a certain diagnosis to an individual even though
the clinical presentation falls just short of meeting the full criteria for the diagnosis as long as the
symptoms that are present are persistent and severe. On the other hand, lack of familiarity with
DSM-5 or excessively flexible and idiosyncratic application of DSM-5 criteria substantially
reduces its utility as a common language for communication.
Clinical Significance Criterion
In the absence of clear biological markers or clinically useful measurements of severity for many
mental disorders, it has not been possible to completely separate normal from pathological
symptom expressions contained in diagnostic criteria. This gap in information is particularly
problematic in clinical situations in which the individual’s symptom presentation by itself
(particularly in mild forms) is not inherently pathological and may be encountered in those for
