Specifiers.
1. Identity: Egocentrism; self-esteem derived from personal gain, power, or
pleasure.
2. Self-direction: Goal setting based on personal gratification; absence of
prosocial internal standards, associated with failure to conform to lawful or
culturally normative ethical behavior.
3. Empathy: Lack of concern for feelings, needs, or suffering of others; lack of
remorse after hurting or mistreating another.
4. Intimacy: Incapacity for mutually intimate relationships, as exploitation is a
primary means of relating to others, including by deceit and coercion; use of
dominance or intimidation to control others.
B. Six or more of the following seven pathological personality traits:
1. Manipulativeness (an aspect of Antagonism): Frequent use of subterfuge
to influence or control others; use of seduction, charm, glibness, or
ingratiation to achieve one’s ends.
2. Callousness (an aspect of Antagonism): Lack of concern for feelings or
problems of others; lack of guilt or remorse about the negative or harmful
effects of one’s actions on others; aggression; sadism.
3. Deceitfulness (an aspect of Antagonism): Dishonesty and fraudulence;
misrepresentation of self; embellishment or fabrication when relating events.
4. Hostility (an aspect of Antagonism): Persistent or frequent angry feelings;
anger or irritability in response to minor slights and insults; mean, nasty, or
vengeful behavior.
5. Risk taking (an aspect of Disinhibition): Engagement in dangerous, risky,
and potentially self-damaging activities, unnecessarily and without regard for
consequences; boredom proneness and thoughtless initiation of activities to
counter boredom; lack of concern for one’s limitations and denial of the reality
of personal danger.
6. Impulsivity (an aspect of Disinhibition): Acting on the spur of the moment in
response to immediate stimuli; acting on a momentary basis without a plan or
consideration of outcomes; difficulty establishing and following plans.
885
7. Irresponsibility (an aspect of Disinhibition): Disregard for—and failure to
honor—financial and other obligations or commitments; lack of respect for—
and lack of follow-through on—agreements and promises.
Note. The individual is at least 18 years of age.
Specify if:
With psychopathic features
A distinct variant often termed psychopathy (or “primary” psychopathy) is marked by
a lack of anxiety or fear and by a bold interpersonal style that may mask maladaptive behaviors
