(e.g., fraudulence). This psychopathic variant is characterized by low levels of anxiousness
(Negative Affectivity domain) and withdrawal (Detachment domain) and high levels of attention
seeking (Antagonism domain). High attention seeking and low withdrawal capture the social
potency (assertive/dominant) component of psychopathy, whereas low anxiousness captures the
stress immunity (emotional stability/resilience) component.
In addition to psychopathic features, trait and personality functioning specifiers may be used
to record other personality features that may be present in antisocial personality disorder but are
not required for the diagnosis. For example, traits of Negative Affectivity (e.g., anxiousness) are
not diagnostic criteria for antisocial personality disorder (see Criterion B) but can be specified
when appropriate. Furthermore, although moderate or greater impairment in personality
functioning is required for the diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder (Criterion A), the level
of personality functioning can also be specified.
Avoidant Personality Disorder
Typical features of avoidant personality disorder are avoidance of social situations and inhibition
in interpersonal relationships related to feelings of ineptitude and inadequacy, anxious
preoccupation with negative evaluation and rejection, and fears of ridicule or embarrassment.
Characteristic difficulties are apparent in identity, self-direction, empathy, and/or intimacy, as
described below, along with specific maladaptive traits in the domains of Negative Affectivity
and Detachment.
Proposed Diagnostic Criteria
A. Moderate or greater impairment in personality functioning, manifested by
characteristic difficulties in two or more of the following four areas:
1. Identity: Low self-esteem associated with self-appraisal as socially inept,
personally unappealing, or inferior; excessive feelings of shame.
2. Self-direction: Unrealistic standards for behavior associated with reluctance
to pursue goals, take personal risks, or engage in new activities involving
interpersonal contact.
3. Empathy: Preoccupation with, and sensitivity to, criticism or rejection,
associated with distorted inference of others’ perspectives as negative.
4. Intimacy: Reluctance to get involved with people unless being certain of
being liked; diminished mutuality within intimate relationships because of fear
of being shamed or ridiculed.
B. Three or more of the following four pathological personality traits, one of which
must be (1) Anxiousness:
1. Anxiousness (an aspect of Negative Affectivity): Intense feelings of
nervousness, tenseness, or panic, often in reaction to social situations; worry
about the negative effects of past unpleasant experiences and future negative
possibilities; feeling fearful, apprehensive, or threatened by uncertainty; fears
of embarrassment.
