Specifiers.
2. Withdrawal (an aspect of Detachment): Reticence in social situations;
avoidance of social contacts and activity; lack of initiation of social contact.
886
3. Anhedonia (an aspect of Detachment): Lack of enjoyment from,
engagement in, or energy for life’s experiences; deficits in the capacity to feel
pleasure or take interest in things.
4. Intimacy avoidance (an aspect of Detachment): Avoidance of close or
romantic relationships, interpersonal attachments, and intimate sexual
relationships.
Considerable heterogeneity in the form of additional personality traits is found among
individuals diagnosed with avoidant personality disorder. Trait and level of personality
functioning specifiers can be used to record additional personality features that may be present in
avoidant personality disorder. For example, other Negative Affectivity traits (e.g., depressivity,
separation insecurity, submissiveness, suspiciousness, hostility) are not diagnostic criteria for
avoidant personality disorder (see Criterion B) but can be specified when appropriate.
Furthermore, although moderate or greater impairment in personality functioning is required for
the diagnosis of avoidant personality disorder (Criterion A), the level of personality functioning
also can be specified.
Borderline Personality Disorder
Typical features of borderline personality disorder are instability of self-image, personal goals,
interpersonal relationships, and affects, accompanied by impulsivity, risk taking, and/or hostility.
Characteristic difficulties are apparent in identity, self-direction, empathy, and/or intimacy, as
described below, along with specific maladaptive traits in the domain of Negative Affectivity,
and also Antagonism and/or Disinhibition.
Proposed Diagnostic Criteria
A. Moderate or greater impairment in personality functioning, manifested by
characteristic difficulties in two or more of the following four areas:
1. Identity: Markedly impoverished, poorly developed, or unstable self-image,
often associated with excessive self-criticism; chronic feelings of emptiness;
dissociative states under stress.
2. Self-direction: Instability in goals, aspirations, values, or career plans.
3. Empathy: Compromised ability to recognize the feelings and needs of others
associated with interpersonal hypersensitivity (i.e., prone to feel slighted or
insulted); perceptions of others selectively biased toward negative attributes
or vulnerabilities.
4. Intimacy: Intense, unstable, and conflicted close relationships, marked by
