Specifiers.
mistrust, neediness, and anxious preoccupation with real or imagined
abandonment; close relationships often viewed in extremes of idealization
and devaluation and alternating between overinvolvement and withdrawal.
B. Four or more of the following seven pathological personality traits, at least one of
which must be (5) Impulsivity, (6) Risk taking, or (7) Hostility:
1. Emotional lability (an aspect of Negative Affectivity): Unstable emotional
experiences and frequent mood changes; emotions that are easily aroused,
intense, and/or out of proportion to events and circumstances.
2. Anxiousness (an aspect of Negative Affectivity): Intense feelings of
nervousness, tenseness, or panic, often in reaction to interpersonal stresses;
worry about the negative effects of past unpleasant experiences and future
negative possibilities; feeling fearful, apprehensive, or threatened by
uncertainty; fears of falling apart or losing control.
3. Separation insecurity (an aspect of Negative Affectivity): Fears of rejection
by—and/or separation from—significant others, associated with fears of
excessive dependency and complete loss of autonomy.
887
4. Depressivity (an aspect of Negative Affectivity): Frequent feelings of being
down, miserable, and/or hopeless; difficulty recovering from such moods;
pessimism about the future; pervasive shame; feelings of inferior self-worth;
thoughts of suicide and suicidal behavior.
5. Impulsivity (an aspect of Disinhibition): Acting on the spur of the moment in
response to immediate stimuli; acting on a momentary basis without a plan or
consideration of outcomes; difficulty establishing or following plans; a sense
of urgency and self-harming behavior under emotional distress.
6. Risk taking (an aspect of Disinhibition): Engagement in dangerous, risky,
and potentially self-damaging activities, unnecessarily and without regard to
consequences; lack of concern for one’s limitations and denial of the reality of
personal danger.
7. Hostility (an aspect of Antagonism): Persistent or frequent angry feelings;
anger or irritability in response to minor slights and insults.
Trait and level of personality functioning specifiers may be used to record additional
personality features that may be present in borderline personality disorder but are not required
for the diagnosis. For example, traits of Psychoticism (e.g., cognitive and perceptual
dysregulation) are not diagnostic criteria for borderline personality disorder (see Criterion B) but
can be specified when appropriate. Furthermore, although moderate or greater impairment in
personality functioning is required for the diagnosis of borderline personality disorder (Criterion
A), the level of personality functioning can also be specified.
Narcissistic Personality Disorder
