Specifiers.
Typical features of narcissistic personality disorder are variable and vulnerable self-esteem, with
attempts at regulation through attention and approval seeking, and either overt or covert
grandiosity. Characteristic difficulties are apparent in identity, self-direction, empathy, and/or
intimacy, as described below, along with specific maladaptive traits in the domain of
Antagonism.
Proposed Diagnostic Criteria
A. Moderate or greater impairment in personality functioning, manifested by
characteristic difficulties in two or more of the following four areas:
1. Identity: Excessive reference to others for self-definition and self-esteem
regulation; exaggerated self-appraisal inflated or deflated, or vacillating
between extremes; emotional regulation mirrors fluctuations in self-esteem.
2. Self-direction: Goal setting based on gaining approval from others; personal
standards unreasonably high in order to see oneself as exceptional, or too
low based on a sense of entitlement; often unaware of own motivations.
3. Empathy: Impaired ability to recognize or identify with the feelings and needs
of others; excessively attuned to reactions of others, but only if perceived as
relevant to self; over- or underestimation of own effect on others.
4. Intimacy: Relationships largely superficial and exist to serve self-esteem
regulation; mutuality constrained by little genuine interest in others’
experiences and predominance of a need for personal gain.
B. Both of the following pathological personality traits:
1. Grandiosity (an aspect of Antagonism): Feelings of entitlement, either overt
or covert; self-centeredness; firmly holding to the belief that one is better than
others; condescension toward others.
888
2. Attention seeking (an aspect of Antagonism): Excessive attempts to attract
and be the focus of the attention of others; admiration seeking.
Trait and personality functioning specifiers may be used to record additional
personality features that may be present in narcissistic personality disorder but are not required
for the diagnosis. For example, other traits of Antagonism (e.g., manipulativeness, deceitfulness,
callousness) are not diagnostic criteria for narcissistic personality disorder (see Criterion B) but
can be specified when more pervasive antagonistic features (e.g., “malignant narcissism”) are
present. Other traits of Negative Affectivity (e.g., depressivity, anxiousness) can be specified to
record more “vulnerable” presentations. Furthermore, although moderate or greater impairment
in personality functioning is required for the diagnosis of narcissistic personality disorder
(Criterion A), the level of personality functioning can also be specified.
