Specifiers.
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
Typical features of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder are difficulties in establishing and
sustaining close relationships, associated with rigid perfectionism, inflexibility, and restricted
emotional expression. Characteristic difficulties are apparent in identity, self-direction, empathy,
and/or intimacy, as described below, along with specific maladaptive traits in the domains of
Negative Affectivity and/or Detachment.
Proposed Diagnostic Criteria
A. Moderate or greater impairment in personality functioning, manifested by
characteristic difficulties in two or more of the following four areas:
1. Identity: Sense of self derived predominantly from work or productivity;
constricted experience and expression of strong emotions.
2. Self-direction: Difficulty completing tasks and realizing goals, associated
with rigid and unreasonably high and inflexible internal standards of behavior;
overly conscientious and moralistic attitudes.
3. Empathy: Difficulty understanding and appreciating the ideas, feelings, or
behaviors of others.
4. Intimacy: Relationships seen as secondary to work and productivity; rigidity
and stubbornness negatively affect relationships with others.
B. Three or more of the following four pathological personality traits, one of which
must be (1) Rigid perfectionism:
1. Rigid perfectionism (an aspect of extreme Conscientiousness [the opposite
pole of Disinhibition]): Rigid insistence on everything being flawless, perfect,
and without errors or faults, including one’s own and others’ performance;
sacrificing of timeliness to ensure correctness in every detail; believing that
there is only one right way to do things; difficulty changing ideas and/or
viewpoint; preoccupation with details, organization, and order.
2. Perseveration (an aspect of Negative Affectivity): Persistence at tasks long
after the behavior has ceased to be functional or effective; continuance of the
same behavior despite repeated failures.
3. Intimacy avoidance (an aspect of Detachment): Avoidance of close or
romantic relationships, interpersonal attachments, and intimate sexual
relationships.
4. Restricted affectivity (an aspect of Detachment): Little reaction to
emotionally arousing situations; constricted emotional experience and
expression; indifference or coldness.
889
Trait and personality functioning specifiers may be used to record additional
