personality features that may be present in obsessive-compulsive personality disorder but are not
required for the diagnosis. For example, other traits of Negative Affectivity (e.g., anxiousness)
are not diagnostic criteria for obsessive-compulsive personality disorder (see Criterion B) but can
be specified when appropriate. Furthermore, although moderate or greater impairment in
personality functioning is required for the diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive personality
disorder (Criterion A), the level of personality functioning can also be specified.
Schizotypal Personality Disorder
Typical features of schizotypal personality disorder are impairments in the capacity for social
and close relationships and eccentricities in cognition, perception, and behavior that are
associated with distorted self-image and incoherent personal goals and accompanied by
suspiciousness and restricted emotional expression. Characteristic difficulties are apparent in
identity, self-direction, empathy, and/or intimacy, along with specific maladaptive traits in the
domains of Psychoticism and Detachment.
Proposed Diagnostic Criteria
A. Moderate or greater impairment in personality functioning, manifested by
characteristic difficulties in two or more of the following four areas:
1. Identity: Confused boundaries between self and others; distorted self-
concept; emotional expression often not congruent with context or internal
experience.
2. Self-direction: Unrealistic or incoherent goals; no clear set of internal
standards.
3. Empathy: Pronounced difficulty understanding impact of own behaviors on
others; frequent misinterpretations of others’ motivations and behaviors.
4. Intimacy: Marked impairments in developing close relationships, associated
with mistrust and anxiety.
B. Four or more of the following six pathological personality traits:
1. Cognitive and perceptual dysregulation (an aspect of Psychoticism): Odd
or unusual thought processes; vague, circumstantial, metaphorical,
overelaborate, or stereotyped thought or speech; odd sensations in various
sensory modalities.
2. Unusual beliefs and experiences (an aspect of Psychoticism): Thought
content and views of reality that are viewed by others as bizarre or
idiosyncratic; unusual experiences of reality.
3. Eccentricity (an aspect of Psychoticism): Odd, unusual, or bizarre behavior
or appearance; saying unusual or inappropriate things.
4. Restricted affectivity (an aspect of Detachment): Little reaction to
emotionally arousing situations; constricted emotional experience and
expression; indifference or coldness.
