Specifiers.
5. Withdrawal (an aspect of Detachment): Preference for being alone to being
with others; reticence in social situations; avoidance of social contacts and
activity; lack of initiation of social contact.
6. Suspiciousness (an aspect of Detachment): Expectations of—and
heightened sensitivity to—signs of interpersonal ill-intent or harm; doubts
about loyalty and fidelity of others; feelings of persecution.
Trait and personality functioning specifiers may be used to record additional
personality features that may be present in schizotypal personality disorder but are not required
for the diagnosis. For example, traits of Negative Affectivity (e.g., depressivity, anxiousness) are
not diagnostic criteria for schizotypal personality disorder (see Criterion B)
890
but can be specified when appropriate. Furthermore, although moderate or greater impairment in
personality functioning is required for the diagnosis of schizotypal personality disorder
(Criterion A), the level of personality functioning can also be specified.
Personality Disorder—Trait Specified
Proposed Diagnostic Criteria
A. Moderate or greater impairment in personality functioning, manifested by
difficulties in two or more of the following four areas:
1. Identity
2. Self-direction
3. Empathy
4. Intimacy
B. One or more pathological personality trait domains OR specific trait facets within
domains, considering ALL of the following domains:
1. Negative Affectivity (vs. Emotional Stability): Frequent and intense
experiences of high levels of a wide range of negative emotions (e.g., anxiety,
depression, guilt/shame, worry, anger), and their behavioral (e.g., self-harm)
and interpersonal (e.g., dependency) manifestations.
2. Detachment (vs. Extraversion): Avoidance of socioemotional experience,
including both withdrawal from interpersonal interactions, ranging from
casual, daily interactions to friendships to intimate relationships, as well as
restricted affective experience and expression, particularly limited hedonic
capacity.
3. Antagonism (vs. Agreeableness): Behaviors that put the individual at odds
with other people, including an exaggerated sense of self-importance and a
