Subtypes.
Specifiers.
concomitant expectation of special treatment, as well as a callous antipathy
toward others, encompassing both unawareness of others’ needs and
feelings and a readiness to use others in the service of self-enhancement.
4. Disinhibition (vs. Conscientiousness): Orientation toward immediate
gratification, leading to impulsive behavior driven by current thoughts,
feelings, and external stimuli, without regard for past learning or consideration
of future consequences.
5. Psychoticism (vs. Lucidity): Exhibiting a wide range of culturally incongruent
odd, eccentric, or unusual behaviors and cognitions, including both process
(e.g., perception, dissociation) and content (e.g., beliefs).
Because personality features vary continuously along multiple trait dimensions, a
comprehensive set of potential expressions of PD-TS can be represented by DSM-5’s
dimensional model of maladaptive personality trait variants (see Table 3, pp. 899–901). Thus,
subtypes are unnecessary for PD-TS, and instead, the descriptive elements that constitute
personality are provided, arranged in an empirically based model. This arrangement allows
clinicians to tailor the description of each individual’s personality disorder profile, considering
all five broad domains of personality trait variation and drawing on the descriptive features of
these domains as needed to characterize the individual.
The specific personality features of individuals are always recorded in evaluating
Criterion B, so the combination of personality features characterizing an individual directly
constitutes the specifiers in each case. For example, two individuals who are both characterized
by emotional lability, hostility, and depressivity may differ such that the first individual is
characterized additionally by callousness, whereas the second is not.
891
Personality Disorder Scoring Algorithms
The requirement for any two of the four A criteria for each of the six personality disorders was
based on maximizing the relationship of these criteria to their corresponding personality
disorder. Diagnostic thresholds for the B criteria were also set empirically to minimize change in
prevalence of the disorders from DSM-IV and overlap with other personality disorders, and to
maximize relationships with functional impairment. The resulting diagnostic criteria sets
represent clinically useful personality disorders with high fidelity, in terms of core impairments
in personality functioning of varying degrees of severity and constellations of pathological
personality traits.
Personality Disorder Diagnosis
Individuals who have a pattern of impairment in personality functioning and maladaptive traits
that matches one of the six defined personality disorders should be diagnosed with that
personality disorder. If an individual also has one or even several prominent traits that may have
clinical relevance in addition to those required for the diagnosis (e.g., see narcissistic personality
