disorder), the option exists for these to be noted as specifiers. Individuals whose personality
functioning or trait pattern is substantially different from that of any of the six specific
personality disorders should be diagnosed with PD-TS. The individual may not meet the required
number of A or B criteria and, thus, have a subthreshold presentation of a personality disorder.
The individual may have a mix of features of personality disorder types or some features that are
less characteristic of a type and more accurately considered a mixed or atypical presentation. The
specific level of impairment in personality functioning and the pathological personality traits that
characterize the individual’s personality can be specified for PD-TS, using the Level of
Personality Functioning Scale (Table 2) and the pathological trait taxonomy (Table 3). The
current diagnoses of paranoid, schizoid, histrionic, and dependent personality disorders are
represented also by the diagnosis of PD-TS; these are defined by moderate or greater impairment
in personality functioning and can be specified by the relevant pathological personality trait
combinations.
Level of Personality Functioning
Like most human tendencies, personality functioning is distributed on a continuum. Central to
functioning and adaptation are individuals’ characteristic ways of thinking about and
understanding themselves and their interactions with others. An optimally functioning individual
has a complex, fully elaborated, and well-integrated psychological world that includes a mostly
positive, volitional, and adaptive self-concept; a rich, broad, and appropriately regulated
emotional life; and the capacity to behave as a productive member of society with reciprocal and
fulfilling interpersonal relationships. At the opposite end of the continuum, an individual with
severe personality pathology has an impoverished, disorganized, and/or conflicted psychological
world that includes a weak, unclear, and maladaptive self-concept; a propensity to negative,
dysregulated emotions; and a deficient capacity for adaptive interpersonal functioning and social
behavior.
Self and Interpersonal Functioning Dimensional Definition
Generalized severity may be the most important single predictor of concurrent and prospective
dysfunction in assessing personality psychopathology. Personality disorders are optimally
characterized by a generalized personality severity continuum with additional
892
specification of stylistic elements, derived from personality disorder symptom constellations and
personality traits. At the same time, the core of personality psychopathology is impairment in
ideas and feelings regarding self and interpersonal relationships; this notion is consistent with
multiple theories of personality disorder and their research bases. The components of the Level
of Personality Functioning Scale—identity, self-direction, empathy, and intimacy (see Table 1)
—are particularly central in describing a personality functioning continuum.
Mental representations of the self and interpersonal relationships are reciprocally influential
and inextricably tied, affect the nature of interaction with mental health professionals, and can
have a significant impact on both treatment efficacy and outcome, underscoring the importance
of assessing an individual’s characteristic self-concept as well as views of other people and
