whom a diagnosis of “mental disorder” would be inappropriate. Therefore, a generic diagnostic
criterion requiring distress or disability has been used to establish disorder thresholds, usually
worded “the disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.” Assessing whether this criterion is met,
especially in terms of role function, is an inherently difficult clinical judgment. The text
following the definition of a mental disorder acknowledges that this criterion may be especially
helpful in determining an individual’s need for treatment. Use of information from the individual
as well as from family members and other third parties via interview or self- or informant-
reported assessments regarding the individual’s performance is often necessary.
Coding and Recording Procedures
The official coding system in use in the United States since October 1, 2015, is the International
Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-10-CM), a version of the
World Health Organization’s ICD-10 that has been modified for clinical use by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention’s National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) and provides the
only permissible diagnostic codes for mental disorders for clinical use in the United States. Most
DSM-5 disorders have an alphanumeric ICD-10-CM code that appears preceding the name of the
disorder (or coded subtype or specifier) in the DSM-5-TR Classification and in the
accompanying criteria set for each disorder. For some diagnoses (e.g., neurocognitive disorders,
substance/medication-induced disorders), the appropriate code depends on further specification
and is listed within the criteria set for the
24
disorder with a coding note, and in some cases is further clarified in the text section “Recording
Procedures.” The names of some disorders are followed by alternative terms enclosed in
parentheses.
The use of diagnostic codes is fundamental to medical record keeping. Diagnostic coding
facilitates data collection and retrieval and compilation of statistical information. Codes also are
often required to report diagnostic data to interested third parties, including governmental
agencies, private insurers, and the World Health Organization. For example, in the United States,
the use of ICD-10-CM codes for disorders in DSM-5-TR has been mandated by the Health Care
Financing Administration for purposes of reimbursement under the Medicare system.
Principal Diagnosis/Reason for Visit
The general convention in DSM-5 is to allow multiple diagnoses to be assigned for those
presentations that meet criteria for more than one DSM-5 disorder. When more than one
diagnosis is given in an inpatient setting, the principal diagnosis is the condition established after
study to be chiefly responsible for occasioning the admission of the individual. When more than
one diagnosis is given for an individual in an outpatient setting, the reason for visit is the
condition that is chiefly responsible for the ambulatory medical services received during the
visit. In most cases, the principal diagnosis or the reason for visit is also the main focus of
attention or treatment. It is often difficult (and somewhat arbitrary) to determine which diagnosis
is the principal diagnosis or the reason for visit. For example, it may be unclear which diagnosis
