Dimensionality of personality traits.
relationships. Although the degree of disturbance in the self and interpersonal functioning is
continuously distributed, it is useful to consider the level of impairment in functioning for
clinical characterization and for treatment planning and prognosis.
Rating Level of Personality Functioning
To use the Level of Personality Functioning Scale (LPFS), the clinician selects the level that
most closely captures the individual’s current overall level of impairment in personality
functioning. The rating is necessary for the diagnosis of a personality disorder (moderate or
greater impairment) and can be used to specify the severity of impairment present for an
individual with any personality disorder at a given point in time. The LPFS may also be used as a
global indicator of personality functioning without specification of a personality disorder
diagnosis, or in the event that personality impairment is subthreshold for a disorder diagnosis.
Personality Traits
Definition and Description
Criterion B in the alternative model involves assessments of personality traits that are grouped
into five domains. A personality trait is a tendency to feel, perceive, behave, and think in
relatively consistent ways across time and across situations in which the trait may manifest. For
example, individuals with a high level of the personality trait of anxiousness would tend to feel
anxious readily, including in circumstances in which most people would be calm and relaxed.
Individuals high in trait anxiousness also would perceive situations to be anxiety-provoking more
frequently than would individuals with lower levels of this trait, and those high in the trait would
tend to behave so as to avoid situations that they think would make them anxious. They would
thereby tend to think about the world as more anxiety provoking than other people.
Importantly, individuals high in trait anxiousness would not necessarily be anxious at all
times and in all situations. Individuals’ trait levels also can and do change throughout life. Some
changes are very general and reflect maturation (e.g., teenagers generally are higher on trait
impulsivity than are older adults), whereas other changes reflect individuals’ life experiences.
All individuals can be located on the spectrum of trait
dimensions; that is, personality traits apply to everyone in different degrees rather than being
present versus absent. Moreover, personality traits, including those identified specifically in the
Section III model, exist on a spectrum with two opposing poles. For example, the opposite of the
trait of callousness is the tendency to be empathic and kind-hearted, even in circumstances in
which most persons would not feel that way. Hence,
893
although in Section III this trait is labeled callousness, because that pole of the dimension is the
primary focus, it could be described in full as callousness versus kind-heartedness. Moreover, its
opposite pole can be recognized and may not be adaptive in all circumstances (e.g., individuals
who, due to extreme kind-heartedness, repeatedly allow themselves to be taken advantage of by
unscrupulous others).
