Hierarchical structure of personality. Some trait terms are quite specific (e.g., “talkative”) and
describe a narrow range of behaviors, whereas others are quite broad (e.g., Detachment) and
characterize a wide range of behavioral propensities. Broad trait dimensions are called domains,
and specific trait dimensions are called facets. Personality trait domains comprise a spectrum of
more specific personality facets that tend to occur together. For example, withdrawal and
anhedonia are specific trait facets in the trait domain of Detachment. Despite some cross-cultural
variation in personality trait facets, the broad domains they collectively comprise are relatively
consistent across cultures.
The Personality Trait Model
The Section III personality trait system includes five broad domains of personality trait variation
—Negative Affectivity (vs. Emotional Stability), Detachment (vs. Extraversion), Antagonism
(vs. Agreeableness), Disinhibition (vs. Conscientiousness), and Psychoticism (vs. Lucidity)—
comprising 25 specific personality trait facets. Table 3 provides definitions of all personality
domains and facets. These five broad domains are maladaptive variants of the five domains of
the extensively validated and replicated personality model known as the “Big Five,” or Five
Factor Model of personality (FFM), and are also similar to the domains of the Personality
Psychopathology Five (PSY-5). The specific 25 facets represent a list of personality facets
chosen for their clinical relevance.
Although the Trait Model focuses on personality traits associated with psychopathology,
there are healthy, adaptive, and resilient personality traits identified as the polar opposites of
these traits, as noted in the parentheses above (i.e., Emotional Stability, Extraversion,
Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, and Lucidity). Their presence can greatly mitigate the effects
of mental disorders and facilitate coping and recovery from traumatic injuries and other medical
illness.
Distinguishing Traits, Symptoms, and Specific Behaviors
Although traits are by no means immutable and do change throughout the life span, they show
relative consistency compared with symptoms and specific behaviors. For example, a person
may behave impulsively at a specific time for a specific reason (e.g., a person who is rarely
impulsive suddenly decides to spend a great deal of money on a particular item because of an
unusual opportunity to purchase something of unique value), but it is only when behaviors
aggregate across time and circumstance, such that a pattern of behavior distinguishes between
individuals, that they reflect traits. Nevertheless, it is important to recognize, for example, that
even people who are impulsive are not acting impulsively all of the time. A trait is a tendency or
disposition toward specific behaviors; a specific behavior is an instance or manifestation of a
trait.
Similarly, traits are distinguished from most symptoms because symptoms tend to wax and
wane, whereas traits are relatively more stable. For example, individuals with higher levels of
depressivity have a greater likelihood of experiencing discrete episodes of a depressive disorder
and of showing the symptoms of these disorders, such as difficulty concentrating. However, even
patients who have a trait propensity to depressivity typically cycle through distinguishable
episodes of mood disturbance, and specific symptoms such as difficulty concentrating tend to
wax and wane in concert with specific episodes, so they do
