894
not form part of the trait definition. Importantly, however, symptoms and traits are both
amenable to intervention, and many interventions targeted at symptoms can affect the longer
term patterns of personality functioning that are captured by personality traits.
Assessment of the DSM-5 Section III Personality Trait Model
The clinical utility of the Section III multidimensional personality trait model lies in its ability to
focus attention on multiple relevant areas of personality variation in each individual patient.
Rather than focusing attention on the identification of one and only one optimal diagnostic label,
clinical application of the Section III personality trait model involves reviewing all five broad
personality domains portrayed in Table 3. The clinical approach to personality is similar to the
well-known review of systems in clinical medicine. For example, an individual’s presenting
complaint may focus on a specific neurological symptom, yet during an initial evaluation
clinicians still systematically review functioning in all relevant systems (e.g., cardiovascular,
respiratory, gastrointestinal), lest an important area of diminished functioning and corresponding
opportunity for effective intervention be missed.
Clinical use of the Section III personality trait model proceeds similarly. An initial inquiry
reviews all five broad domains of personality. This systematic review is facilitated by the use of
formal psychometric instruments designed to measure specific facets and domains of personality.
For example, the personality trait model is operationalized in the Personality Inventory for DSM-
5 (PID-5), which can be completed in its self-report form by patients and in its informant-report
form by those who know the patient well (e.g., a spouse). A detailed clinical assessment would
involve collection of both patient- and informant-report data on all 25 facets of the personality
trait model. However, if this is not possible, due to time or other constraints, assessment focused
at the five-domain level is an acceptable clinical option when only a general (vs. detailed)
portrait of a patient’s personality is needed (see Criterion B of PD-TS). However, if personality-
based problems are the focus of treatment, then it will be important to assess individuals’ trait
facets as well as domains.
Because personality traits are continuously distributed in the population, an approach to
making the judgment that a specific trait is elevated (and therefore is present for diagnostic
purposes) could involve comparing individuals’ personality trait levels with population norms
and/or clinical judgment. If a trait is elevated—that is, formal psychometric testing and/or
interview data support the clinical judgment of elevation—then it is considered as contributing to
meeting Criterion B of Section III personality disorders.
Clinical Utility of the Multidimensional Personality Functioning and
Trait Model
Disorder and trait constructs each add value to the other in predicting important antecedent (e.g.,
family history, history of child abuse), concurrent (e.g., functional impairment, medication use),
and predictive (e.g., hospitalization, suicide attempts) variables. DSM-5 impairments in
personality functioning and pathological personality traits each contribute independently to
clinical decisions about degree of disability; risks for self-harm, violence, and criminality;
recommended treatment type and intensity; and prognosis—all important aspects of the utility of
