distortions and
confusion around
self-appraisal.
Emotions not congruent
with context or
internal experience.
Hatred and
aggression may be
dominant affects,
although they may be
disavowed and
attributed to others.
Is profoundly unable to
constructively
reflect on own
experience. Personal
motivations may be
unrecognized and/or
experienced as
external to self.
seeks fulfillment of basic
needs or escape from pain.
899
TABLE 3 Definitions of DSM-5 personality disorder trait domains and facets
DOMAINS (Polar
Opposites) and Facets
Definitions
NEGATIVE AFFECTIVITY
(vs. Emotional Stability)
Frequent and intense experiences of high levels of a wide range of negative emotions (e.g.,
anxiety, depression, guilt/shame, worry, anger) and their behavioral (e.g., self-harm) and
interpersonal (e.g., dependency) manifestations.
Emotional lability
Instability of emotional experiences and mood; emotions that are easily aroused, intense, and/or
out of proportion to events and circumstances.
Anxiousness
Feelings of nervousness, tenseness, or panic in reaction to diverse situations; frequent worry
about the negative effects of past unpleasant experiences and future negative possibilities;
feeling fearful and apprehensive about uncertainty; expecting the worst to happen.
Separation insecurity
Fears of being alone due to rejection by—and/or separation from—significant others, based in a
lack of confidence in one’s ability to care for oneself, both physically and emotionally.
Submissiveness
Adaptation of one’s behavior to the actual or perceived interests and desires of others even when
doing so is antithetical to one’s own interests, needs, or desires.
Hostility
Persistent or frequent angry feelings; anger or irritability in response to minor slights and
insults; mean, nasty, or vengeful behavior. See also Antagonism.
Perseveration
Persistence at tasks or in a particular way of doing things long after the behavior has ceased to
be functional or effective; continuance of the same behavior despite repeated failures or clear
reasons for stopping.
Depressivity
See Detachment.
Suspiciousness
See Detachment.
Restricted affectivity (lack of)
The lack of this facet characterizes low levels of Negative Affectivity. See Detachment for
definition of this facet.
DETACHMENT (vs.
Extraversion)
Avoidance of socioemotional experience, including both withdrawal from interpersonal
interactions (ranging from casual, daily interactions to friendships to intimate relationships)
and restricted affective experience and expression, particularly limited hedonic capacity.
Withdrawal
Preference for being alone to being with others; reticence in social situations; avoidance of
social contacts and activity; lack of initiation of social contact.
Intimacy avoidance
Avoidance of close or romantic relationships, interpersonal attachments, and intimate sexual
relationships.
Anhedonia
Lack of enjoyment from, engagement in, or energy for life’s experiences; deficits in the capacity
to feel pleasure and take interest in things.
Depressivity
Feelings of being down, miserable, and/or hopeless; difficulty recovering from such moods;
pessimism about the future; pervasive shame and/or guilt; feelings of inferior self-worth;
thoughts of suicide and suicidal behavior.
Restricted affectivity
Little reaction to emotionally arousing situations; constricted emotional experience and
expression; indifference and aloofness in normatively engaging situations.
