Suspiciousness
Expectations of—and sensitivity to signs of—interpersonal ill-intent or harm; doubts about
loyalty and fidelity of others; feelings of being mistreated, used, and/or persecuted by others.
900
ANTAGONISM (vs.
Agreeableness)
Behaviors that put the individual at odds with other people, including an exaggerated sense of
self-importance and a concomitant expectation of special treatment, as well as a callous
antipathy toward others, encompassing both an unawareness of others’ needs and feelings and
a readiness to use others in the service of self-enhancement.
Manipulativeness
Use of subterfuge to influence or control others; use of seduction, charm, glibness, or
ingratiation to achieve one’s ends.
Deceitfulness
Dishonesty and fraudulence; misrepresentation of self; embellishment or fabrication when
relating events.
Grandiosity
Believing that one is superior to others and deserves special treatment; self-centeredness;
feelings of entitlement; condescension toward others.
Attention seeking
Engaging in behavior designed to attract notice and to make oneself the focus of others’
attention and admiration.
Callousness
Lack of concern for the feelings or problems of others; lack of guilt or remorse about the
negative or harmful effects of one’s actions on others.
Hostility
See Negative Affectivity.
DISINHIBITION (vs.
Conscientiousness)
Orientation toward immediate gratification, leading to impulsive behavior driven by current
thoughts, feelings, and external stimuli, without regard for past learning or consideration of
future consequences.
Irresponsibility
Disregard for—and failure to honor—financial and other obligations or commitments; lack of
respect for—and lack of follow-through on—agreements and promises; carelessness with
others’ property.
Impulsivity
Acting on the spur of the moment in response to immediate stimuli; acting on a momentary
basis without a plan or consideration of outcomes; difficulty establishing and following plans;
a sense of urgency and self-harming behavior under emotional distress.
Distractibility
Difficulty concentrating and focusing on tasks; attention is easily diverted by extraneous stimuli;
difficulty maintaining goal-focused behavior, including both planning and completing tasks.
Risk taking
Engagement in dangerous, risky, and potentially self-damaging activities, unnecessarily and
without regard to consequences; lack of concern for one’s limitations and denial of the reality
of personal danger; reckless pursuit of goals regardless of the level of risk involved.
Rigid perfectionism (lack of)
Rigid insistence on everything being flawless, perfect, and without errors or faults, including
one’s own and others’ performance; sacrificing of timeliness to ensure correctness in every
detail; believing that there is only one right way to do things; difficulty changing ideas and/or
viewpoint; preoccupation with details, organization, and order. The lack of this facet
characterizes low levels of Disinhibition.
901
PSYCHOTICISM (vs.
Lucidity)
Exhibiting a wide range of culturally incongruent odd, eccentric, or unusual behaviors and
cognitions, including both process (e.g., perception, dissociation) and content (e.g., beliefs).
Unusual beliefs and
experiences
Belief that one has unusual abilities, such as mind reading, telekinesis, thought-action fusion;
unusual experiences of reality, including hallucination-like experiences.
Eccentricity
Odd, unusual, or bizarre behavior, appearance, and/or speech; having strange and unpredictable
thoughts; saying unusual or inappropriate things.
Cognitive and perceptual
dysregulation
Odd or unusual thought processes and experiences, including depersonalization, derealization,
and dissociative experiences; mixed sleep-wake state experiences; thought-control
experiences.
902
