Conditions for Further Study
Proposed criteria sets are presented for conditions on which future research is
encouraged. It is hoped that such research will allow the field to better understand these
conditions and inform future decisions about possible placement in forthcoming editions of
DSM. Notably, persistent complex bereavement disorder, originally located in this section, has
been moved to the chapter “Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders” as an official diagnosis in
Section II. On the basis of thorough reviews finding sufficient evidence of validity, reliability,
and clinical utility to justify its new placement, it is now named “prolonged grief disorder” and
the criteria have been appropriately reformulated.
The specific items, thresholds, and minimum durations contained in these research criteria
sets were set by expert consensus—informed by literature review, data reanalysis, and field trial
results, where available—and are intended to provide a common language for researchers and
clinicians who are interested in studying these disorders. The DSM-5 Task Force and Work
Groups subjected each of these proposed criteria sets to a careful empirical review and invited
wide commentary from the field as well as from the general public. The Task Force ultimately
determined that there was insufficient evidence to warrant inclusion of these proposals as official
mental disorder diagnoses in Section II of DSM-5. These proposed criteria sets are therefore
not intended for clinical use; only the criteria sets and disorders in Section II of DSM-5 are
officially recognized and should be used for clinical purposes.
Attenuated Psychosis Syndrome
Proposed Criteria
A. At least one of the following symptoms is present and is of sufficient severity or
frequency to warrant clinical attention:
1. Attenuated delusions.
2. Attenuated hallucinations.
3. Attenuated disorganized speech.
B. Symptom(s) must have been present at least once per week for the past month.
C. Symptom(s) must have begun or worsened in the past year.
D. Symptom(s) is sufficiently distressing and disabling to the individual to warrant
clinical attention.
E. Symptom(s) is not better explained by another mental disorder, including a
depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features, and is not attributable to
