the physiological effects of a substance or another medical condition.
F. Criteria for any psychotic disorder have never been met.
904
Diagnostic Features
Attenuated psychotic symptoms, as defined in Criterion A, are psychosis-like but below the
threshold to be considered a psychotic symptom that would count toward the diagnosis of a
psychotic disorder. Compared with full psychotic disorders, the symptoms are less severe and
more transient. Moreover, the individual maintains reasonable insight into the psychotic-like
experiences and generally appreciates that perceptions are altered, and magical ideation is not
compelling. Attenuated psychosis does not have the fixed nature that is necessary for the
diagnosis of a full-blown psychotic disorder. In attenuated psychosis, doubt about beliefs can be
elicited, skepticism about perceptions can be induced, and insight can be tested using open-ended
questions, such as “I see that this is how you experience the world—could there be a different
explanation?” A diagnosis of attenuated psychosis syndrome requires state psychopathology
associated with functional impairment rather than long-standing trait pathology. The
psychopathology has not progressed to full psychotic severity. Changes in experiences and
behaviors are noted by the individual or others, suggesting a clinically significant change in
mental state (i.e., the symptoms are of sufficient severity or frequency to warrant clinical
attention) (Criterion A).
Attenuated delusions (Criterion A1) may have suspiciousness/persecutory ideational content,
including persecutory ideas of reference. The individual may have a guarded, distrustful attitude.
When this type of attenuated delusion is moderate in severity, the individual views others as
untrustworthy and may be hypervigilant or sense ill will in others. When the attenuated delusions
are severe but below the threshold to be considered psychotic, the individual entertains loosely
organized beliefs about danger or hostile intention. Guarded behavior in the interview can
interfere with the ability to gather information, and the propensity for viewing the world as
hostile and dangerous is strong. On the other hand, attenuated delusions may have grandiose
content presenting as an unrealistic sense of superior capacity. When this type of attenuated
delusion is moderate in severity, the individual harbors notions of being gifted, influential, or
special. When the attenuated delusions are severe, the individual has beliefs of superiority that
often alienate friends and worry relatives. Thoughts of being special may lead to unrealistic plans
and investments.
Attenuated hallucinations (Criterion A2) include alterations in sensory perceptions, usually
auditory and/or visual. When the attenuated hallucinations are moderate, the sounds and images
are often unformed (e.g., shadows, trails, halos, murmurs, rumbling), and they are experienced as
unusual or puzzling. When the attenuated hallucinations are severe, these experiences become
more vivid and frequent (i.e., recurring illusions or hallucinations that capture attention and
affect thinking and concentration). These perceptual abnormalities may disrupt behavior, but
skepticism about their reality can still be induced.
Attenuated disorganized communication (Criterion A3) may manifest as odd speech (vague,
metaphorical, overelaborate, stereotyped), unfocused speech (confused, muddled, too fast or too
slow, wrong words, irrelevant context, off track), or meandering speech (circumstantial,
