should be considered “principal” for an individual hospitalized with both schizophrenia and
alcohol use disorder, because each condition may have contributed equally to the need for
admission and treatment. The principal diagnosis is indicated by listing it first, and the remaining
disorders are listed in order of focus of attention and treatment. When the principal diagnosis or
reason for visit is a mental disorder due to another medical condition (e.g., major neurocognitive
disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, psychotic disorder due to malignant lung neoplasm), ICD
coding rules require that the etiological medical condition be listed first. In that case, the
principal diagnosis or reason for visit would be the mental disorder due to the medical condition,
the second listed diagnosis. For maximum clarity, the disorder listed as the principal diagnosis or
the reason for visit can be followed by the qualifying phrase “(principal diagnosis)” or “(reason
for visit).”
Provisional Diagnosis
The modifier “provisional” can be used when there is currently insufficient information to
indicate that the diagnostic criteria are met, but there is a strong presumption that the information
will become available to allow that determination. The clinician can indicate the diagnostic
uncertainty by recording “(provisional)” following the diagnosis. For example, this modifier
might be used when an individual who appears to have a presentation consistent with a diagnosis
of current major depressive disorder is unable to give an adequate history, but it is expected that
such information will become available after interviewing an informant or reviewing medical
records. Once that information becomes available and confirms that the diagnostic criteria were
met, the modifier “(provisional)” would be removed. Another use of “provisional” is for those
situations in which differential diagnosis depends exclusively on whether the duration of illness
does not exceed an upper limit as required by the diagnostic criteria. For example, a diagnosis of
schizophreniform disorder requires a duration of at least 1 month but less than 6 months. If an
individual currently has symptoms consistent with a diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder
except that the ultimate duration is unknown because the symptoms are still ongoing, the
modifier “(provisional)” would be applied and then removed if the symptoms remit within a
period of 6 months. If they do not remit, the diagnosis would be changed to schizophrenia.
25
Notes About Terminology
Substance/Medication-Induced Mental Disorder
The term “substance/medication-induced mental disorder” refers to symptomatic presentations
that are due to the physiological effects of an exogenous substance on the central nervous
system, including symptoms that develop during withdrawal from an exogenous substance that is
capable of causing physiological dependence. Such exogenous substances include typical
intoxicants (e.g., alcohol, inhalants, hallucinogens, cocaine), psychotropic medications (e.g.,
stimulants; sedatives, hypnotics, anxiolytics), other medications (e.g., steroids), and
environmental toxins (e.g., organophosphate insecticides). Editions of DSM from DSM-III to
DSM-IV referred to these as “substance-induced mental disorders.” To emphasize that
medications and not just substances of abuse can cause psychiatric symptoms, the term was
