tangential). When the disorganization is moderately severe, the individual frequently gets into
irrelevant topics but responds easily to clarifying questions. Speech becomes meandering and
circumstantial and may be odd but understandable. When the disorganization is severe, the
individual fails to get to the point without external guidance (tangential). At a more severe level,
some thought blocking or loose associations may occur infrequently, especially when the
individual is under pressure, but reorienting questions quickly return structure and organization
to the conversation.
The individual must experience distress and/or impaired performance in social or role
functioning (Criterion D), and the individual or responsible others must note the changes and
express concern, such that clinical care is indicated (Criterion A).
905
Measures are available to determine whether Criteria A–E are met or to broadly identify a
clinical high-risk state for psychosis.
Associated Features
The individual may experience magical thinking, difficulty in concentration, some
disorganization in thought or behavior, excessive suspiciousness, anxiety, social withdrawal, and
disruption in sleep-wake cycle. Impaired cognitive function and negative symptoms are often
observed.
Neuroimaging variables distinguish cohorts with attenuated psychosis syndrome from normal
control cohorts with patterns similar to, but less severe than, that observed in schizophrenia.
However, neuroimaging data are not diagnostic at the individual level.
Prevalence
Very little information is available about prevalence. However, in Switzerland, where one of the
few relevant studies was conducted, the prevalence of attenuated psychosis syndrome in non-
help-seeking individuals ages 16–40 years was found to be only 0.3%. Another 2.3% have
attenuated symptoms that meet Criterion A, but these symptoms either began prior to the past
year or had not worsened in the past year, as required by Criterion C. In up to 7% of the general
population across a broad range of countries, individuals acknowledge experiencing attenuated
delusions or hallucinations. While the prevalence of Criterion A symptoms can be higher or
lower across countries or ethnonational groups, the prevalence of attenuated psychosis symptoms
tends to be higher among migrant groups than among native populations, possibly due to higher
exposure to trauma and discrimination.
Development and Course
Onset of attenuated psychosis syndrome is usually in mid-to-late adolescence or early adulthood.
It may be preceded by normal development or evidence for impaired cognition, negative
symptoms, or impaired social development. In help-seeking cohorts, those whose presentations
met criteria for attenuated psychosis syndrome had an increased probability of developing
psychosis compared with those whose presentations did not meet the criteria. In the group whose
presentations met criteria, the 3-year cumulative risk was up to 22%, and in the group whose
