Temperamental.
Genetic and physiological.
presentations did not meet criteria, the 3-year cumulative risk of psychosis was 1.54%. Factors
predicting progression to a full psychotic disorder (most frequently schizophrenia spectrum
disorder) include male sex, lifetime stress/trauma, unemployment, living alone, severity of
attenuated positive psychotic symptoms, severity of negative symptoms, disorganized and
cognitive symptoms, and poor functioning. Eleven percent of those attenuated psychosis
syndrome cases that progress to full psychosis develop affective psychosis (depressive or bipolar
disorder with psychotic features), whereas 73% of attenuated psychosis syndrome cases that
progress to full psychosis develop a schizophrenia spectrum disorder. Most evidence has
validated attenuated psychotic symptom criteria in individuals ages 12–35 years, but there is only
limited evidence in the youngest. Although the highest risk for transition to psychosis is within
the first 2 years, individuals continue to be at risk for up to 10 years after initial referral, with an
overall risk of transition of 34.9% over a 10-year period. Individuals presenting with attenuated
psychosis syndrome may display other poor clinical outcomes beyond the development of
psychosis, such as persistent attenuated psychotic symptoms, persistent or recurrent comorbid
mental disorders, disability, and low functioning. Clinical remission is present in only one-third
of individuals with attenuated psychosis syndrome. Overall, about one-third of these individuals
would develop psychosis, one-third would remit, and one-third would present persistent
disability.
906
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Factors predicting prognosis of attenuated psychosis syndrome have not been
definitively characterized.
In individuals whose symptoms meet criteria for attenuated psychosis
syndrome, there is no evidence that a family history of psychosis increases the risk of psychosis
compared with control subjects over a 4-year period. Structural, functional, electrophysiological,
and neurochemical imaging data are associated with increased risk of transition to psychosis.
However, these predictors have not yet been validated for clinical use.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Assessing the presence of attenuated symptoms without considering the impact of sociocultural
context can be difficult. Some perceptual experiences (e.g., hearing noises, seeing shadows) and
religious or supernatural beliefs (e.g., evil eye, causing illness through curses, influence of
spirits) may be considered odd in some cultural contexts and accepted in others. In addition,
populations that experience trauma or persecution (e.g., torture, political violence, racism,
discrimination) can report symptoms and fears that may be misjudged as attenuated or frank
paranoid delusions, because of the impact of trauma on the individual’s mood and
communication (e.g., some fears may be appropriate to avoid threats, and may commingle with
fears of recurrence of trauma or posttraumatic symptoms). Groups at higher risk of misdiagnosis
include migrants, socially oppressed ethnic and racialized populations, and other groups facing
social adversity and discrimination. The distress and impairment criterion helps to distinguish
socioculturally normative experiences from symptoms of attenuated psychosis syndrome (e.g.,
adaptive wariness toward authority figures by discriminated groups, which may be confused with
