Brief psychotic disorder.
Schizotypal personality disorder.
Reality distortions occurring in other mental disorders.
Adjustment reaction of adolescence.
Extreme end of perceptual aberration and magical thinking in the non-ill population.
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
paranoia).
Functional Consequences of Attenuated Psychosis Syndrome
Many individuals may experience functional impairments at presentation. Modest-to-moderate
impairment in social and role functioning may persist even with abatement of symptoms.
Differential Diagnosis
When symptoms of attenuated psychosis syndrome initially manifest,
they may resemble symptoms of brief psychotic disorder. However, in attenuated psychosis
syndrome, the attenuated symptoms (delusions, hallucinations, or disorganized speech) do not
cross the psychosis threshold.
Symptomatic features of schizotypal personality disorder,
particularly during early stages of presentation, are similar to those of attenuated psychosis
syndrome. However, schizotypal personality disorder is a relatively stable trait disorder not
meeting the state-dependent aspects (Criterion C) of attenuated psychosis syndrome. In addition,
a broader array of symptoms is required for the diagnosis of schizotypal personality disorder.
Reality 
distortions 
that 
can 
resemble
attenuated delusions can occur in the context of other mental disorders (e.g., feelings of low self-
esteem or attributions of low regard from others in the context of major depressive disorder, a
feeling of being the focus of undesired attention in the context of social anxiety disorder, inflated
self-esteem in the context of pressured speech and reduced need for sleep in bipolar I or bipolar
II disorder, a sense of being unable to experience feelings in the context of an intense fear of real
or imagined abandonment and recurrent self-mutilation in borderline personality disorder). If
these reality distortions occur only during
907
the course of another mental disorder, an additional diagnosis of attenuated psychosis syndrome
would not be made.
Mild, transient symptoms typical of normal development and
consistent with the degree of stress experienced do not qualify for attenuated psychosis
syndrome.
This 
diagnostic
possibility should be strongly entertained when reality distortions are not associated with distress
and functional impairment and need for care.
Attenuated 
delusions 
and 
attenuated
hallucinations can occur in the context of intoxication with cannabis, hallucinogens,
phencyclidine, inhalants, and stimulants, or during withdrawal from alcohol and sedatives,
hypnotics, or anxiolytics. Attenuated psychosis syndrome should not be diagnosed if the
attenuated psychotic symptoms occur only during substance use, in which case a diagnosis of
substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder may be preferred.
A history of attentional impairment does not exclude a
current attenuated psychosis syndrome diagnosis. Earlier attentional impairment may be a
