prodromal condition or comorbid attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Comorbidity
Most individuals with attenuated psychosis syndrome experience some comorbid mental
disorder, mostly depression (41%) and/or anxiety (15%). A little more than half of individuals
have at least one comorbid disorder at follow-up, most of which were present when the
individual was first assessed; the persistence of comorbid disorders at follow-up is associated
with poor clinical and functional outcomes. Although some individuals with an attenuated
psychosis syndrome diagnosis will progress to developing a new diagnosis, including anxiety,
depressive, bipolar, and personality disorders, individuals with attenuated psychosis syndrome
are not at increased risk of developing new nonpsychotic disorders compared with help-seeking
control subjects.
Depressive Episodes With Short-Duration Hypomania
Proposed Criteria
Lifetime experience of at least one major depressive episode meeting the
following criteria:
A. Five (or more) of the following criteria have been present during the same 2-
week period and represent a change from previous functioning; at least one of
the symptoms is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.
(Note: Do not include symptoms that are clearly attributable to a medical
condition.)
1. Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either
subjective report (e.g., feels sad, empty, or hopeless) or observation made by
others (e.g., appears tearful). (Note: In children and adolescents, can be
irritable mood.)
2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most of
the day, nearly every day (as indicated by either subjective account or
observation).
3. Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of
more than 5% of body weight in a month), or decrease or increase in appetite
nearly every day. (Note: In children, consider failure to make expected weight
gain.)
908
4. Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
5. Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others,
not merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed down).
