6. Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
7. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be
delusional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or guilt about being
sick).
8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day
(either by subjective account or as observed by others).
9. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ideation
without a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for committing
suicide.
B. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or
another medical condition.
D. The disturbance is not better explained by schizoaffective disorder and is not
superimposed on schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder,
or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
disorder.
At least two lifetime episodes of hypomanic periods that involve the required
criterion symptoms below but are of insufficient duration (at least 2 days but
less than 4 consecutive days) to meet criteria for a hypomanic episode. The
criterion symptoms are as follows:
A. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable
mood and abnormally and persistently increased activity or energy.
B. During the period of mood disturbance and increased energy and activity, three
(or more) of the following symptoms have persisted (four if the mood is only
irritable), represent a noticeable change from usual behavior, and have been
present to a significant degree:
1. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
2. Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hours of sleep).
3. More talkative than usual or pressured to keep talking.
4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
5. Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to unimportant or irrelevant
external stimuli), as reported or observed.
6. Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or
sexually) or psychomotor agitation.
7. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful
consequences (e.g., the individual engages in unrestrained buying sprees,
sexual indiscretions, or foolish business investments).
C. The episode is associated with an unequivocal change in functioning that is
uncharacteristic of the individual when not symptomatic.
D. The disturbance in mood and the change in functioning are observable by
