Genetic and physiological.
others.
E. The episode is not severe enough to cause marked impairment in social or
occupational functioning or to necessitate hospitalization. If there are psychotic
features, the episode is, by definition, manic.
F. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
drug of abuse, a medication or other treatment).
909
Diagnostic Features
Individuals with depressive episodes with short-duration hypomania have experienced at least
one major depressive episode as well as at least two episodes of 2–3 days’ duration in which
criteria for a hypomanic episode were met (except for symptom duration). These episodes are of
sufficient intensity to be categorized as a hypomanic episode but do not meet the 4-day duration
requirement. Symptoms are present to a significant degree, such that they represent a noticeable
change from the individual’s normal behavior.
An individual with a history of a syndromal hypomanic episode and a major depressive
episode by definition has bipolar II disorder, regardless of current duration of hypomanic
symptoms.
Associated Features
Individuals who have experienced both short-duration hypomania and a major depressive
episode, with their increased psychiatric comorbidity, greater family history of bipolar disorder,
earlier onset, more recurrent major depressive episodes, and higher rate of suicide attempts, more
closely resemble individuals with bipolar disorder than those with major depressive disorder.
Prevalence
The prevalence of depressive episodes with short-duration hypomania is unclear, as
epidemiological studies have yet to be published using the DSM-5 definition. Using somewhat
different criteria (subthreshold hypomania defined by either of the following: duration shorter
than 4 days or having fewer than three Criterion B symptoms), major depressive disorder with
subthreshold hypomania occurs in up to 6.7% of the U.S. population, making it more common
than bipolar I or II disorder. In clinical settings studied across diverse countries, however,
depressive episodes with short-duration hypomania is about one-fourth as common as depressive
episodes with full-duration hypomania. Depressive episodes with short-duration hypomania may
be more common in women, who may present with more features of atypical depression.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
A family history of bipolar disorder is three to four times more
common among individuals with depressive episodes with short-duration hypomania than among
those with major depressive disorder, whereas family history of bipolar disorder is similar among
individuals with depressive episodes and short- versus full-duration hypomania.
