Bipolar II disorder.
Major depressive disorder.
Major depressive disorder with mixed features.
Bipolar I disorder.
Cyclothymic disorder.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Individuals with depressive episodes with short-duration hypomania have higher rates of suicide
attempts than individuals with major depressive disorder and similar rates of suicide attempts
compared with individuals with depressive episodes and full-duration hypomania (bipolar II
disorder).
Functional Consequences of Short-Duration Hypomania
Functional impairments associated specifically with depressive episodes with short-duration
hypomania are as yet not fully determined. However, research suggests that individuals with this
disorder have similar global assessment of functioning scores as compared to those with
depressive episodes with full-duration hypomania.
910
Differential Diagnosis
Bipolar II disorder is characterized by major depressive episodes and
hypomanic episodes, whereas depressive episodes with short-duration hypomania are
characterized by depressive episodes with periods of 2–3 days of hypomanic symptoms. Once an
individual has experienced a full-blown hypomanic episode lasting 4 days or more in addition to
lifetime major depressive episodes, the diagnosis changes to and remains bipolar II disorder
regardless of the duration of future hypomanic symptom periods.
Major depressive disorder is also characterized by at least one lifetime
major depressive episode. However, the additional presence of at least two lifetime periods of 2–
3 days of hypomanic symptoms leads to a diagnosis of depressive episodes with short-duration
hypomania rather than to major depressive disorder.
Both major depressive disorder with mixed features
and depressive episodes with short-duration hypomania are characterized by the presence of
some hypomanic symptoms and a major depressive episode. However, major depressive disorder
with mixed features is characterized by hypomanic features that manifest concurrently with a
major depressive episode, whereas individuals with depressive episodes with short-duration
hypomania experience subsyndromal hypomania and fully syndromal major depression at
different times.
Bipolar I disorder is differentiated from depressive episodes with short-
duration hypomania by at least one lifetime manic episode, which is longer (at least 1 week) and
more severe (causing marked impairment in social or occupational functioning or necessitating
hospitalization to prevent harm to self and others) than a hypomanic episode. An episode (of any
duration) that involves psychotic symptoms or necessitates hospitalization is by definition a
manic episode rather than a hypomanic one.
While cyclothymic disorder is characterized by periods of depressive
symptoms and periods of hypomanic symptoms, the lifetime presence of a major depressive
episode precludes the diagnosis of cyclothymic disorder.
