Caffeine Use Disorder
Proposed Criteria
A problematic pattern of caffeine use leading to clinically significant impairment or
distress, as manifested by at least the first three of the following criteria occurring
within a 12-month period:
1. A persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control caffeine use.
2. Continued caffeine use despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent
physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or
exacerbated by caffeine.
3. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for caffeine.
b. Caffeine (or a closely related substance) is taken to relieve or avoid
withdrawal symptoms.
4. Caffeine is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was
intended.
5. Recurrent caffeine use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at
work, school, or home (e.g., repeated tardiness or absences from work or school
related to caffeine use or withdrawal).
6. Continued caffeine use despite having persistent or recurrent social or
interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of caffeine (e.g.,
arguments with spouse about consequences of use, medical problems, cost).
911
7. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of caffeine to achieve desired effect.
b. Markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
caffeine.
8. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain caffeine, use
caffeine, or recover from its effects.
9. Craving or a strong desire or urge to use caffeine.
Various research studies have provided documentation and characterization of individuals
with problematic caffeine use, and several reviews provide an analysis of this literature. The
working diagnostic algorithm proposed for the study of caffeine use disorder differs from that of
the other substance use disorders, reflecting the need to identify only cases that have sufficient
clinical importance to warrant the labeling of a mental disorder. A key goal of including caffeine
use disorder in this section of DSM-5 is to stimulate research that will determine the reliability,
validity, and prevalence of caffeine use disorder based on the proposed diagnostic schema, with
particular attention to the association of the diagnosis with functional impairments as part of
validity testing.
