The proposed criteria for caffeine use disorder reflect the need for a diagnostic threshold
higher than that used for the other substance use disorders. Such a threshold is intended to
prevent overdiagnosis of caffeine use disorder due to the high rate of habitual nonproblematic
daily caffeine use in the general population.
Diagnostic Features
Caffeine use disorder is characterized by the continued use of caffeine and failure to control use
despite negative physical and/or psychological consequences. In two U.S. population surveys,
14%–17% of caffeine users endorsed caffeine use despite physical or psychological problems,
34%–45% reported a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to control caffeine use, and 18%–
27% reported withdrawal or using caffeine to relieve or avoid withdrawal. In these same surveys,
some caffeine users reported using more caffeine than intended, spending a great deal of time
using or obtaining caffeine (e.g., drinking coffee all day and until the evening), tolerance, a
strong desire or craving for caffeine, failure to fulfill major role obligations due to caffeine (e.g.,
spending family vacation time searching for caffeinated beverages, resulting in relationship
distress; repeatedly late for work due to need to get coffee), and, to a much lesser extent, caffeine
use despite social or interpersonal problems. Medical and psychological problems attributed to
caffeine included heart, stomach, and urinary problems, and complaints of anxiety, depression,
insomnia, irritability, and difficulty thinking.
In a study of 2,259 Hungarian caffeine consumers, factor analysis of the nine caffeine use
disorder criteria resulted in a one-factor solution, suggesting that caffeine use disorder is a
unitary construct. In two Baltimore-area caffeine treatment studies, the most commonly endorsed
criteria were withdrawal (97%), persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to control use (91%–
94%), and use despite knowledge of physical or psychological problems caused by caffeine
(75%–91%).
Among individuals seeking treatment for problematic caffeine use, 88% reported having
made prior serious attempts to modify caffeine use, and 43%–47% reported having been advised
by a medical professional to reduce or eliminate caffeine. Common reported reasons for
modifying caffeine use were health-related (59%) and a desire to not be dependent on caffeine
(35%).
The text for caffeine withdrawal in the Section II chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive
Disorders” provides information on the features of the withdrawal criterion. It is well
documented that habitual caffeine users can experience a well-defined withdrawal syndrome
upon acute abstinence from caffeine, and many caffeine-dependent individuals report continued
use of caffeine to avoid experiencing withdrawal symptoms.
912
Prevalence
The prevalence of caffeine use disorder in the general population is unclear. One population-
based study in Vermont reported that 9% of individuals endorsed the three proposed DSM-5
caffeine use disorder criteria plus tolerance. In a sample of 1,006 caffeine-consuming adults
recruited using demographic quotas to reflect the U.S. population, 8% endorsed all three criteria
required for a caffeine use disorder diagnosis.
