Genetic and physiological.
In a sample of caffeine-consuming adolescents presenting for routine medical care in a
Boston hospital, 3.9% endorsed all three criteria required for a caffeine use disorder diagnosis.
Among a convenience sample of caffeine consumers in Hungary, 13.9% endorsed all three
criteria, with 4.3% of those reporting that the symptoms caused significant distress in their
everyday life.
Development and Course
Individuals whose pattern of use meets criteria for a caffeine use disorder have shown a wide
range of daily caffeine intake and have been consumers of various types of caffeinated products
(e.g., coffee, soft drinks, tea, energy drinks) and medications. A diagnosis of caffeine use
disorder has been shown to prospectively predict a greater incidence of caffeine reinforcement
and more severe withdrawal.
There has been no longitudinal or cross-sectional lifespan research on caffeine use disorder.
Caffeine use disorder has been identified in both adolescents and adults. Rates of caffeine
consumption and overall level of caffeine consumption in the United States tend to increase with
age. Age-related factors for caffeine use disorder are unknown, although concern is growing
related to excessive caffeine consumption among adolescents and young adults through use of
caffeinated energy drinks.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Heritabilities of heavy caffeine use, caffeine tolerance, and caffeine
withdrawal range from 35% to 77%. For caffeine use, alcohol use, and cigarette smoking, a
common genetic factor (polysubstance use) underlies the use of these three substances, with
28%–41% of the heritable effects of caffeine use (or heavy use) shared with alcohol and
smoking. Caffeine and tobacco use and use disorders are associated with and substantially
influenced by genetic factors unique to these licit drugs. The magnitude of heritability for
caffeine use disorder markers appears to be similar to that for alcohol and tobacco use disorder
markers.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Consumption of caffeine is affected by geographic origin, cultural context, lifestyle, social
behavior, and economic status. The type of caffeinated beverage preferred (e.g., tea; coffee;
carbonated sodas containing caffeine; mate [a beverage made from the herb yerba mate]) and the
mode of preparation vary globally, leading to marked differences in the amounts and types of
compounds in a “cup” of coffee, tea, or mate. These differences must be considered when
assessing the quantity of caffeine ingested.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
No research specifically addresses the relationship between caffeine use disorder and suicidal
thoughts or behavior. There is contradictory evidence regarding caffeine consumption; namely,
that high levels of caffeine consumption either may be associated with increased risk for suicidal
thoughts or behavior or may be protective for suicidal thoughts or behavior.
