changed to “substance/medication-induced” in DSM-5.
Independent Mental Disorders
Historically, mental disorders were divided into those that were termed “organic” (caused by
physical factors) versus those that were “nonorganic” (purely of the mind; also referred to as
“functional” or “psychogenic”), terms that were included in DSM up through DSM-III-R.
Because these dichotomies misleadingly implied that the nonorganic disorders have no
biological basis and that mental disorders have no physical basis, DSM-IV updated this
terminology as follows: 1) the terms “organic” and “nonorganic” were eliminated from DSM-IV;
2) the disorders formerly called “organic” were divided into those due to the direct physiological
effects of a substance (substance-induced) and those due to the direct physiological effects of a
medical condition on the central nervous system; and 3) the term “nonorganic mental disorders”
(i.e., those disorders not due to either substances or medical conditions) was replaced by
“primary mental disorder.” In DSM-5, this terminology was further refined, replacing “primary”
with “independent” (e.g., Criterion C in substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder starts
with “the disturbance is not better accounted for by an anxiety disorder that is not substance-
induced. Evidence of an independent anxiety disorder could include . . .” [italics added for
reference]). This was done to reduce the potential for confusion given that the term “primary”
has historically had other meanings (e.g., it is sometimes used to indicate which disorder among
several comorbid disorders was the first to occur). The use of “independent mental disorder”
should not be construed to mean that the disorder is independent of other potential causal factors
such as psychosocial or other environmental stressors.
Other Medical Conditions
Another dichotomy adopted by prior editions of DSM that reflected mind-body dualism was the
division of disorders into “mental disorders” and “physical disorders.” In conjunction with the
elimination of organic/nonorganic terminology, DSM-IV replaced the “mental disorder” versus
“physical disorder” dichotomy with a “mental disorder” vs. “general medical condition”
dichotomy, based on chapter location within the International Classification of Diseases (ICD).
Medical conditions in ICD have been divided into 17 chapters based on a variety of factors,
which include etiology (e.g., Neoplasms [Chapter 2]), anatomical location (e.g., Diseases of the
ear and mastoid process [Chapter 8]), body system (e.g., Diseases of the circulatory system
[Chapter 9]), and context (e.g., Pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium [Chapter 15]). In the
ICD framework, mental disorders are those located in Chapter 5, and general medical conditions
are those located within the other 16 chapters. Because of concerns that the term “general
medical condition” could be conflated with general practice, DSM-5 uses the term “another
medical condition” to emphasize the fact that mental disorders are medical conditions and that
mental disorders can be precipitated by other medical conditions. It is important to recognize that
“mental
26
disorder” and “another medical condition” are merely terms of convenience and should not be
taken to imply that there is any fundamental distinction between mental disorders and other
medical conditions, that mental disorders are unrelated to physical or biological factors or
