Nonproblematic use of caffeine.
Other stimulant use disorder.
Anxiety disorders.
913
Functional Consequences of Caffeine Use Disorder
One U.S. population survey found that those who fulfilled the criteria for caffeine use disorder
were more likely to report greater caffeine-related distress, feeling bad or guilty about caffeine
use, sleep problems, anxiety, depression, and stress. A greater number of total symptoms
endorsed also predicted these negative outcomes. Caffeine use disorder may predict greater use
of caffeine during pregnancy.
Differential Diagnosis
The distinction between nonproblematic use of caffeine and
caffeine use disorder can be difficult to make because social, behavioral, or psychological
problems may be difficult to attribute to the substance, especially in the context of use of other
substances. Regular, heavy caffeine use that can result in tolerance and withdrawal is relatively
common, which by itself should not be sufficient for making a diagnosis.
Problems related to use of other stimulant medications or substances
may approximate the features of caffeine use disorder.
Chronic heavy caffeine use may mimic generalized anxiety disorder, and acute
caffeine consumption may produce and mimic panic attacks.
Comorbidity
Comorbidities associated with caffeine use disorder include daily cigarette smoking, cannabis
use disorder, and a family or personal history of alcohol use disorder. Compared with individuals
in the general population, rates of caffeine use disorder are higher among those seeking treatment
for problematic caffeine use; individuals who use tobacco; high school and college students; and
those with histories of alcohol or illicit drug misuse. Features of caffeine use disorder may be
positively associated with several diagnoses: major depression, generalized anxiety disorder,
panic disorder, antisocial personality disorder, and alcohol, cannabis, and cocaine use disorders.
Internet Gaming Disorder
Proposed Criteria
Persistent and recurrent use of the Internet to engage in games, often with other
players, leading to clinically significant impairment or distress as indicated by five (or
more) of the following in a 12-month period:
1. Preoccupation with Internet games. (The individual thinks about previous gaming
activity or anticipates playing the next game; Internet gaming becomes the
dominant activity in daily life.)
Note: This disorder is distinct from Internet gambling, which is included under
gambling disorder.
