2. Withdrawal symptoms when Internet gaming is taken away. (These symptoms
are typically described as irritability, anxiety, or sadness, but there are no
physical signs of pharmacological withdrawal.)
3. Tolerance—the need to spend increasing amounts of time engaged in Internet
games.
4. Unsuccessful attempts to control the participation in Internet games.
5. Loss of interests in previous hobbies and entertainment as a result of, and with
the exception of, Internet games.
914
6. Continued excessive use of Internet games despite knowledge of psychosocial
problems.
7. Has deceived family members, therapists, or others regarding the amount of
Internet gaming.
8. Use of Internet games to escape or relieve a negative mood (e.g., feelings of
helplessness, guilt, anxiety).
9. Has jeopardized or lost a significant relationship, job, or educational or career
opportunity because of participation in Internet games.
Note: Only nongambling Internet games are included in this disorder. Use of the
Internet for required activities in a business or profession is not included; nor is the
disorder intended to include other recreational or social Internet use. Similarly,
sexual Internet sites are excluded.
Specify current severity:
Internet gaming disorder can be mild, moderate, or severe depending on the
degree of disruption of normal activities. Individuals with less severe Internet
gaming disorder may exhibit fewer symptoms and less disruption of their lives.
Those with severe Internet gaming disorder will have more hours spent on the
computer and more severe loss of relationships or career or school
opportunities.
Gambling disorder is currently the only non-substance-related disorder included in the DSM-
5 Section II chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders.” However, there are other
behavioral disorders that show some similarities to substance use disorders and gambling
disorder for which the word addiction is commonly used in nonmedical settings, and the one
condition with a considerable literature is the compulsive playing of Internet games. Internet
gaming has been reportedly defined as an “addiction” by the Chinese government and is
considered a public health threat in South Korea, where treatment and prevention systems have
been set up. Reports of treatment of this condition have appeared in medical journals, mostly
from Asian countries, but also in the United States and other high-income countries.
The DSM-5 work group reviewed more than 240 articles and found some behavioral
similarities of Internet gaming to gambling disorder and to substance use disorders. The literature
suffers, however, from lack of a standard definition from which to derive prevalence data. An
understanding of the natural histories of cases, with or without treatment, is also missing. The
