literature does describe many underlying similarities to substance addictions, including aspects
of tolerance, withdrawal, repeated unsuccessful attempts to cut back or quit, and impairment in
normal functioning. Further, the seemingly high prevalence rates, both in Asian countries and in
the West, justified inclusion of this disorder in Section III of DSM-5 and in the Mental,
Behavioural, and Neurodevelopmental Disorders chapter in ICD-11. Note that since the
publication of DSM-5, the number of clinical reports has continued to accumulate, but many of
the issues remain unresolved.
Internet gaming disorder has achieved significant public health importance, and additional
research may eventually lead to evidence that Internet gaming disorder (also commonly referred
to as Internet use disorder, Internet addiction, or gaming addiction) has merit as an independent
disorder. As with gambling disorder, there should be epidemiological studies to determine
prevalence, clinical course, possible genetic influence, and potential biological factors based on,
for example, brain imaging data.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Internet gaming disorder is a pattern of excessive and prolonged
participation in Internet gaming that results in a cluster of cognitive and behavioral symptoms,
including progressive loss of control over gaming, tolerance, and withdrawal
915
symptoms, analogous to the symptoms of substance use disorders. These Internet-based games
typically involve competition between groups of players who are often in different global
regions, so that extended duration of play is encouraged by time-zone independence. Although
Internet gaming disorder most often involves specific Internet games with multiplayer
competition, it can include non-Internet computerized off-line games as well, although these
have been less researched. The Internet gaming often includes a significant aspect of social
interactions during play, and the team aspects of play appear to be a key motivation. Attempts to
direct the individual toward schoolwork or interpersonal activities are strongly resisted.
Individuals with Internet gaming disorder continue to sit at a computer and engage in gaming
activities despite neglect of other activities. They typically devote 8–10 hours or more per day to
this activity and at least 30 hours per week. If they are prevented from using a computer and
returning to the game, they become agitated and angry. They often go for long periods without
food or sleep. Normal obligations, such as school or work, or family obligations are neglected.
Until the optimal criteria and threshold for diagnosis are determined empirically,
conservative definitions ought to be used, such that diagnoses are considered for endorsement of
five or more of nine criteria.
Associated Features
Although no consistent personality types associated with Internet gaming disorder have been
identified, negative affectivity, detachment, antagonism, disinhibition, and psychoticism have
been associated with the disorder. Individuals with compulsive Internet gaming have
demonstrated brain activation in specific regions triggered by exposure to the Internet game but
not limited to reward system structures.
