Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Prevalence
The mean prevalence of 12-month Internet gaming disorder is estimated as 4.7% across multiple
countries, with a range of 0.7% to 15.6% across studies. Research using the DSM-5 proposed
criteria suggests that prevalence is similar in Asian and Western countries. In the United States,
based on large Internet-based surveys, the prevalence of DSM-5 Internet gaming disorder is 1%
or lower. An international meta-analysis of 16 studies found a pooled prevalence of Internet
gaming disorder among adolescents of 4.6%, with adolescent boys/men generally reporting a
higher prevalence rate (6.8%) than adolescent girls/women (1.3%).
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Computer availability with Internet connection allows access to the types of
games with which Internet gaming disorder is most often associated.
Adolescent men seem to be at greatest risk of developing Internet
gaming disorder.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Internet gaming disorder appears to be more common in adolescent and young adult men than
adolescent and young adult women. Adolescent boys ages 12–15 years also may be at greater
risk of adverse effects of disordered gaming (e.g., lower school grades, loneliness). There may
also be gender differences in the types of games played, in that adolescent girls ages 12–15 tend
to choose games that include puzzles, music, and social and educational themes, whereas
adolescent boys of the same age more often choose action, fighting, strategy, and role-playing
games that may have greater addictive potential.
916
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Few studies specifically address suicide in individuals diagnosed with Internet gaming disorder,
but studies on a broader phenotype of problematic Internet and online gaming behaviors are
available. A nationally representative household survey of Australian youth ages 11–17 years
(Young Minds Matter) found that problem Internet and online gaming behavior was associated
with higher risk of suicide attempt in the prior year. After controlling for demographics,
depression, family support, and self-esteem, a survey study of 9,510 Taiwanese students ages
12–18 years found that Internet addiction, including online gaming, was associated with suicidal
thoughts and suicide attempt. In a representative sample of 8,807 students from randomly
selected European schools, 3.62% had Internet gaming disorder (using DSM-5 criteria), and
3.11% of the students were considered to have pathological Internet use but were not gamers.
Both groups showed similarly increased risks for emotional symptoms, conduct disorder,
hyperactivity/inattention, self-injurious behaviors, and suicidal thoughts and behavior. The
mental health effects of problematic Internet use, including suicidal thoughts or behavior, appear
to be related to and perhaps mediated by the impact of problematic Internet use on sleep.
Functional Consequences of Internet Gaming Disorder
