5. Impairment in visual-spatial reasoning (e.g., disorganized or poorly planned
drawings or constructions; problems differentiating left from right).
C. Impaired self-regulation as manifested by one or more of the following:
1. Impairment in mood or behavioral regulation (e.g., mood lability; negative
affect or irritability; frequent behavioral outbursts).
2. Attention deficit (e.g., difficulty shifting attention; difficulty sustaining mental
effort).
3. Impairment in impulse control (e.g., difficulty waiting turn; difficulty complying
with rules).
D. Impairment in adaptive functioning as manifested by two or more of the
following, one of which must be (1) or (2):
1. Communication deficit (e.g., delayed acquisition of language; difficulty
understanding spoken language).
2. Impairment in social communication and interaction (e.g., overly friendly with
strangers; difficulty reading social cues; difficulty understanding social
consequences).
3. Impairment in daily living skills (e.g., delayed toileting, feeding, or bathing;
difficulty managing daily schedule).
4. Impairment in motor skills (e.g., poor fine motor development; delayed
attainment of gross motor milestones or ongoing deficits in gross motor
function; deficits in coordination and balance).
E. Onset of the disorder (symptoms in Criteria B, C, and D) occurs in childhood.
F. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
academic, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
G. The disorder is not better explained by the direct physiological effects associated
with postnatal use of a substance (e.g., a medication, alcohol or other drugs), a
general medical condition (e.g., traumatic brain injury, delirium, dementia),
another known teratogen (e.g., fetal hydantoin syndrome), a genetic condition
(e.g., Williams syndrome, Down syndrome, Cornelia de Lange syndrome), or
environmental neglect.
Alcohol is a neurobehavioral teratogen, and prenatal alcohol exposure has teratogenic effects
on central nervous system (CNS) development and subsequent function. Neurobehavioral
disorder associated with prenatal alcohol exposure (ND-PAE) is a new clarifying term, intended
to encompass the full range of developmental disabilities associated with exposure to alcohol in
utero. ND-PAE may be diagnosed both in the absence and in the presence of the physical effects
of prenatal alcohol exposure (e.g., facial dysmorphology required for a diagnosis of fetal alcohol
syndrome).
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of ND-PAE are the manifestation of impairment in neurocognitive,
