behavioral, and adaptive functioning associated with prenatal alcohol exposure. Impairment can
be documented based on past diagnostic evaluations (e.g., psychological or educational
assessments) or medical records, reports by the individual or informants, and/or observation by a
clinician.
A clinical diagnosis of fetal alcohol syndrome, including specific prenatal alcohol-related
facial dysmorphology and growth retardation, can be used as evidence of
918
significant levels of prenatal alcohol exposure; specific guidelines for facial dysmorphology
have been developed for diverse ethnoracial physiognomies. Although both animal and human
studies have documented adverse effects of lower levels of drinking, identifying how much
prenatal exposure is needed to significantly impact neurodevelopmental outcome remains
challenging. Data suggest that a history of more than minimal gestational exposure prior to
pregnancy recognition and/or following pregnancy recognition may be required. More than
minimal exposure is defined as greater than 13 drinks per month during pregnancy or more than
2 drinks on any one occasion. Identifying a minimal threshold of drinking during pregnancy will
require consideration of a variety of factors known to affect exposure and/or interact to influence
developmental outcomes, including stage of prenatal development, gestational smoking,
maternal and fetal genetics, and maternal physical status (i.e., age, health, and certain obstetric
problems).
Symptoms of ND-PAE include marked impairment in global intellectual performance (IQ) or
neurocognitive impairments in any of the following areas: executive functioning, learning,
memory, and/or visual-spatial reasoning. Impairments in self-regulation are present and may
include impairment in mood or behavioral regulation, attention deficit, or impairment in impulse
control. Finally, impairments in adaptive functioning include communication deficits and
impairment in social communication and interaction. Impairment in daily living (self-help) skills
and impairment in motor skills may be present. As it may be difficult to obtain an accurate
assessment of the neurocognitive abilities of very young children, it is appropriate to defer a
diagnosis for children 3 years of age and younger.
Associated Features
Associated features vary depending on age, degree of alcohol exposure, and the individual’s
environment. An individual can be diagnosed with this disorder regardless of socioeconomic or
cultural background. However, ongoing parental alcohol/substance misuse, parental mental
illness, exposure to domestic or community violence, neglect or abuse, disrupted caregiving
relationships, multiple out-of-home placements, and lack of continuity in medical or mental
health care are often present.
Prevalence
In the United States, the prevalence of ND-PAE (encompassing fetal alcohol spectrum disorders)
has been estimated as 15.2/1,000 (range: 11.3–50.0/1,000), with higher estimates derived when
only children with full evaluations were included (31.1–98.5/1,000). When vulnerable
subpopulations are considered, rates of ND-PAE can be much higher (e.g., among children in
