Environmental.
care settings, 251.5/1,000), according to a meta-analysis of data from multiple countries. In
2012, the mean global prevalence of fetal alcohol spectrum disorder in the general population
was 7.7 per 1,000 individuals, with a prevalence of 8.8 per 1,000 in the region of the Americas
(including the United States).
Development and Course
Among individuals with prenatal alcohol exposure, evidence of CNS dysfunction varies
according to developmental stage. Although about one-half of young children prenatally exposed
to alcohol show marked developmental delay in the first 3 years of life, other children affected
by prenatal alcohol exposure may not exhibit signs of CNS dysfunction until they are preschool-
or school-age. Additionally, impairments in higher order cognitive processes (i.e., executive
functioning), which are often associated with prenatal alcohol exposure, may be more easily
assessed in older children. When children reach school age, learning difficulties, impairment in
executive function, and problems with integrative language functions usually emerge more
clearly, and both social skills deficits and challenging behavior may become more evident. In
particular, as school and other requirements
919
become more complex, greater deficits are noted. Because of this, the school years represent the
ages at which a diagnosis of ND-PAE would be most likely.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Low socioeconomic status and low educational level in the mother are risk
factors for fetal alcohol syndrome. This association is related to social, structural, and
psychological factors that may increase the risk of maternal drinking or worsen its impact,
including social determinants of health, such as the high concentration of liquor stores in low-
income, ethnoracially segregated communities.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Socioeconomic and cultural factors affect the consumption of alcohol during pregnancy, which
ranges globally from 0.2% in the Eastern Mediterranean region to 25.2% in the European region.
Individuals belonging to ethnic groups that have higher proportions of certain alleles of alcohol-
metabolizing enzymes (e.g., of aldehyde dehydrogenase 2) may be less likely to exhibit the
effects of prenatal alcohol exposure.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Suicide is a high-risk outcome, with rates increasing significantly in late adolescence and early
adulthood. Analyses of the Canadian national fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD) database
show that among individuals with FASD who have impaired affect regulation, there is a
markedly higher risk of suicidal thoughts or behavior. In an Alberta-based registry, it was found
that individuals with fetal alcohol syndrome are at markedly increased risk for premature death,
with 15% dying from suicide. In California, a study of 54 adolescents ages 13–18 years with
