FASD also demonstrated markedly higher rates of suicidal thoughts and serious attempts (all by
boys) compared with the general U.S. adolescent population. In a Canadian survey, the mothers
of individuals with FASD were over six times as likely to die by suicide and almost five times
more likely to attempt suicide after giving birth to a child with FASD compared with mothers
whose child did not have FASD, suggesting that the increased rates of suicidal ideation and
suicide attempts among youth with FASD may be mediated by family factors (genetic and/or
environmental), in addition to any risk conferred by the FASD condition itself.
Functional Consequences of Neurobehavioral Disorder Associated
With Prenatal Alcohol Exposure
The CNS dysfunction seen in individuals with ND-PAE often leads to decrements in adaptive
behavior and to maladaptive behavior with lifelong consequences. Abnormalities have been
associated with ND-PAE in multiple organ systems, including the heart, kidney, liver,
gastrointestinal tract, and endocrine systems. Individuals affected by prenatal alcohol exposure
have a higher prevalence of disrupted school experiences, poor employment records, trouble with
the law, confinement (legal or psychiatric), and dependent living conditions.
Differential Diagnosis
Other considerations include maternal exposure to other substances during the prenatal period;
poor prenatal care; the physiological effects of postnatal substance use, such as a medication,
alcohol, or other substances; disorders due to another medical condition, such as traumatic brain
injury or other neurocognitive disorders (e.g., delirium, major neurocognitive disorder
[dementia]); and environmental neglect.
Genetic conditions such as Williams syndrome, Down syndrome, or Cornelia de Lange
syndrome and other teratogenic conditions such as fetal hydantoin syndrome and
920
maternal phenylketonuria may have similar physical and behavioral characteristics. A careful
review of prenatal exposure history is needed to clarify the teratogenic agent, and an evaluation
by a clinical geneticist may be needed to distinguish physical characteristics associated with
these and other genetic conditions.
Comorbidity
Mental health problems have been identified in more than 90% of individuals with histories of
significant prenatal alcohol exposure. The most common co-occurring diagnosis is attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, but research has shown that individuals with ND-PAE differ in
neuropsychological characteristics and in their responsiveness to pharmacological interventions.
Other high- probability co-occurring disorders include oppositional defiant disorder and conduct
disorder, but the appropriateness of these diagnoses should be weighed in the context of the
significant impairments in general intellectual and executive functioning that are often associated
with prenatal alcohol exposure. Mood symptoms, including symptoms of bipolar disorder and
depressive disorders, have been described. History of prenatal alcohol exposure is associated
with an increased risk for later tobacco, alcohol, and other substance use disorders.
