Suicidal Behavior Disorder
Proposed Criteria
A. Within the last 24 months, the individual has made a suicide attempt.
Note: A suicide attempt is a self-initiated sequence of behaviors by an individual
who, at the time of initiation, expected that the set of actions would lead to his or
her own death. (The “time of initiation” is the time when a behavior took place
that involved applying the method.)
B. The act does not meet criteria for nonsuicidal self-injury—that is, it does not
involve self-injury directed to the surface of the body undertaken to induce relief
from a negative feeling/cognitive state or to achieve a positive mood state.
C. The diagnosis is not applied to suicidal ideation or to preparatory acts.
D. The act was not initiated during a state of delirium or confusion.
E. The act was not undertaken solely for a political or religious objective.
Specify if:
Current: Not more than 12 months since the last attempt.
In early remission: 12–24 months since the last attempt.
Note: ICD-10-CM codes to indicate whether suicidal behavior is part of the current
clinical presentation (T14.91A for initial encounter and T14.91D for subsequent
encounters) and/or whether there has been a prior history of suicidal behavior (Z91.51)
are available for clinical use to accompany any DSM-5 diagnosis; in addition, the codes
can be recorded in the absence of a DSM-5 diagnosis. The definition of these codes is
included in Section II, “Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention” (see
“Suicidal Behavior”).
Specifiers
Suicidal behavior is often categorized in terms of violence of the method. Generally, overdoses
with legal or illegal substances are considered nonviolent in method, whereas jumping, gunshot
wounds, and other methods are considered violent. Another dimension for classification is
medical consequences of the behavior, with high-lethality attempts being defined as those
requiring medical hospitalization beyond a visit to an emergency
921
department. An additional dimension considered includes the degree of planning versus
impulsiveness of the attempt, a characteristic that might have consequences for the medical
outcome of a suicide attempt.
If the suicidal behavior occurred 12–24 months prior to evaluation, the condition is
considered to be in early remission.
