processes, or that other medical conditions are unrelated to behavioral or psychosocial factors or
processes.
Types of Information in the DSM-5-TR Text
The DSM-5-TR text provides contextual information to aid in diagnostic decision-making. The
text appears immediately following the diagnostic criteria for each disorder and systematically
describes the disorder under the following headings: Recording Procedures, Subtypes, Specifiers,
Diagnostic Features, Associated Features, Prevalence, Development and Course, Risk and
Prognostic Factors, Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues, Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic
Issues, Diagnostic Markers, Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior, Functional
Consequences, Differential Diagnosis, and Comorbidity. In general, when limited information is
available for a section, that section is not included.
Recording Procedures provides guidelines for reporting the name of the disorder and for
selecting and recording the appropriate ICD-10-CM diagnostic code. It also includes
instructions for applying any appropriate subtypes and/or specifiers.
Subtypes and/or Specifiers provide brief descriptions of applicable subtypes and/or
specifiers.
Diagnostic Features provides descriptive text illustrating the use of the criteria and includes
key points on their interpretation. For example, within the diagnostic features for
schizophrenia, it is explained that some symptoms that may appear to be negative symptoms
could instead be attributable to medication side effects.
Associated Features includes clinical features that are not represented in the criteria but
occur significantly more often in individuals with the disorder than those without the
disorder. For example, individuals with generalized anxiety disorder may also experience
somatic symptoms that are not contained within the disorder criteria.
Prevalence describes rates of the disorder in the community, most often described as 12-
month prevalence, although for some disorders point prevalence is noted. Prevalence
estimates are also provided by age group and by ethnoracial/cultural group when possible.
Sex ratio (prevalence in men vs. women) is also provided in this section. When international
data are available, geographic variance in prevalence rates is described. For some disorders,
especially those for which there are limited data on rates in the community, prevalence in
relevant clinical samples is noted.
Development and Course describes the typical lifetime patterns of presentation and
evolution of the disorder. It notes the typical age at onset and whether the presentation may
have prodromal/insidious features or may manifest abruptly. Other descriptions may include
an episodic versus persistent course as well as a single episode versus a recurrent episodic
course. Descriptors in this section may address duration of symptoms or episodes as well as
progression of severity and associated functional impact. The general trend of the disorder
over time (e.g., stable, worsening, improving) is described here. Variations that may be
noted include features related to developmental stage (e.g., infancy, childhood, adolescence,
adulthood, late life).
Risk and Prognostic Factors includes a discussion of factors thought to contribute to the
