Diagnostic Features
The essential manifestation of suicidal behavior disorder is a suicide attempt. A suicide attempt
is a behavior that the individual has undertaken with at least some intent to die. The behavior
might or might not lead to injury or serious medical consequences. Several factors can influence
the medical consequences of the suicide attempt, including poor planning, lack of knowledge
about the lethality of the method chosen, low intentionality or ambivalence, or chance
intervention by others after the behavior has been initiated. These should not be considered in
assigning the diagnosis.
Determining the degree of intent can be challenging. Individuals might not acknowledge
intent, especially in situations where doing so could result in hospitalization or cause distress to
loved ones. Markers of risk include degree of planning, including selection of a time and place to
minimize rescue or interruption; the individual’s mental state at the time of the behavior, with
acute agitation being especially concerning; recent discharge from inpatient care; or recent
discontinuation of a mood stabilizer such as lithium or an antipsychotic such as clozapine in the
case of schizophrenia. Examples of environmental “triggers” include recently learning of a
potentially fatal medical diagnosis such as cancer, experiencing the sudden and unexpected loss
of a close relative or partner, loss of employment, or displacement from housing. Conversely,
features such as talking to others about future events or preparedness to sign a contract for safety
are less reliable indicators.
In order for the criteria to be met, the individual must have made at least one suicide attempt.
Suicide attempts can include behaviors in which, after initiating the suicide attempt, the
individual changed his or her mind or someone intervened. For example, an individual might
intend to ingest a given amount of medication or poison, but either stop or be stopped by another
before ingesting the full amount. If the individual is dissuaded by another or changes his or her
mind before initiating the behavior, the diagnosis should not be made. The acts qualifying for a
diagnosis of suicidal behavior disorder should not have been initiated exclusively during a state
of delirium or confusion. If the individual deliberately became intoxicated before initiating the
suicidal behavior in order to reduce anticipatory anxiety and to minimize interference with the
intended behavior, the diagnosis can still be made.
Currently there are no clinical instruments that yield positive predictive values sufficient to
make them useful tools for predicting suicidal behavior at the patient level. It is not surprising
that single clinical or biological factors are poor indicators of suicide risk, because suicidal
behavior emerges from a convergence of multiple risk factors. Moreover, given the clinical
heterogeneity of suicidal behavior, it is likely that there are multiple pathways to suicidal
behavior that can only be captured if this heterogeneity is considered. Similarly, numerous
biomarkers have been studied, but no robust predictor has emerged.
Development and Course
Suicidal behavior disorder can occur at any time in the life span but is rarely seen in children
under the age of 5. Approximately 25%–30% of persons who attempt suicide will go on to make
more attempts. There is significant variability in terms of frequency, method, and lethality of
attempts. However, this is not different from what is observed in other illnesses, such as major
depressive disorder, in which frequency of episode, subtype of episode, and impairment for a
given episode can vary significantly.
