Genetic and physiological.
922
Risk and Prognostic Factors
The largest genome-wide association study of suicide attempt to date,
from the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, found that the genetic risk for depression increases
the risk for suicide attempt across diagnostic cohorts with major depressive disorder, bipolar
disorder, and schizophrenia. In other words, across diagnostic categories, attempters carry more
risk alleles for depression than nonattempters, rather than simply for their primary psychiatric
diagnosis. These results suggest that the genetic associations with suicide attempt are partly
unique and partly shared with the genetic associations with depression.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Cultural contexts affect the frequency and form of suicidal behavior disorder, including
variations in incidence and prevalence, methods used (e.g., poisoning with pesticides in low-
income countries; gunshot wounds in the southwestern United States), motivations,
circumstances, and meanings. These patterns vary over time, by migrant or ethnic group, and by
service setting. Culturally mediated social stressors and predicaments such as family
breakdowns, perceived loss of dignity or interpersonal status, conflicting intergenerational roles
and expectations due to differential acculturation, changing levels of sociocultural integration,
stigma and self-stigma about suicide, and systemic discrimination and structural inequity
(institutionalized socioeconomic bias and oppression) may contribute to the risk of suicidal
behavior disorder. Attitudes toward suicide and suicidal behaviors are influenced by historical,
environmental, economic, political, legal, social, cultural, moral, and spiritual or religious
factors. For example, in a longitudinal U.S. sample followed across generations, parental belief
(self-identified as mostly Protestant and Catholic) in the importance of religion was associated
with lower risk of suicidal behavior in their offspring, independent of an offspring’s own belief
about religious importance and other known parental factors, such as parental depression,
suicidal behavior, and divorce. The reasons for suicide attempts and choice of suicide methods
may have cultural significance, which may be associated with specific individual and social
responses (e.g., of stigma, shame, or respect).
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Suicidal behavior disorder varies in prevalence and form across sex and gender. On average,
suicides are about twice as common in men compared with women, although the prevalence ratio
varies by country and cultural context. Estimates also vary because the intent of self-harm
behaviors is not always clearly measured; however, suicidal behavior that does not result in
death is more common in women than in men. Men generally use more lethal methods such as
gunshots and hanging, whereas less lethal means such as self-poisoning are more common in
women. The frequency of suicidal behaviors is higher in women (i.e., the average number of
suicide attempts for a woman is generally higher than the average number for a man), but this
could be explained by the more frequent use of less lethal methods among women. Suicide rates
among individuals who identify as transgender are high, and transgender individuals are also at
higher risk for suicidal behavior than cisgender individuals.
