Diagnostic Markers
Laboratory abnormalities consequent to the suicidal attempt are often evident. Suicidal behavior
that leads to blood loss can be accompanied by anemia, hypotension, or shock. Overdoses might
lead to coma or obtundation and associated laboratory abnormalities such as electrolyte
imbalances.
923
Comorbidity
Suicidal behavior disorder is seen in the context of a variety of mental disorders, most commonly
bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder, schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, anxiety
disorders (in particular, panic disorders associated with catastrophic content and PTSD
flashbacks), substance use disorders (especially alcohol use disorders), borderline personality
disorder, antisocial personality disorder, eating disorders, and adjustment disorders.
Nonsuicidal Self-Injury Disorder
Proposed Criteria
A. In the last year, the individual has, on 5 or more days, engaged in intentional
self-inflicted damage to the surface of his or her body of a sort likely to induce
bleeding, bruising, or pain (e.g., cutting, burning, stabbing, hitting, excessive
rubbing), with the expectation that the injury will lead to only minor or moderate
physical harm (i.e., there is no suicidal intent).
Note: The absence of suicidal intent has either been stated by the individual or
can be inferred by the individual’s repeated engagement in a behavior that the
individual knows, or has learned, is not likely to result in death.
B. The individual engages in the self-injurious behavior with one or more of the
following expectations:
1. To obtain relief from a negative feeling or cognitive state.
2. To resolve an interpersonal difficulty.
3. To induce a positive feeling state.
Note: The desired relief or response is experienced during or shortly after the
self-injury, and the individual may display patterns of behavior suggesting a
dependence on repeatedly engaging in it.
C. The intentional self-injury is associated with at least one of the following:
1. Interpersonal difficulties or negative feelings or thoughts, such as depression,
anxiety, tension, anger, generalized distress, or self-criticism, occurring in the
period immediately prior to the self-injurious act.
2. Prior to engaging in the act, a period of preoccupation with the intended
