behavior that is difficult to control.
3. Thinking about self-injury that occurs frequently, even when it is not acted
upon.
D. The behavior is not socially sanctioned (e.g., body piercing, tattooing, part of a
religious or cultural ritual) and is not restricted to picking a scab or nail biting.
E. The behavior or its consequences cause clinically significant distress or
interference in interpersonal, academic, or other important areas of functioning.
F. The behavior does not occur exclusively during psychotic episodes, delirium,
substance intoxication, or substance withdrawal. In individuals with a
neurodevelopmental disorder, the behavior is not part of a pattern of repetitive
stereotypies. The behavior is not better explained by another mental disorder or
medical condition (e.g., psychotic disorder, autism spectrum disorder, intellectual
developmental 
disorder 
[intellectual 
disability], 
Lesch-Nyhan 
syndrome,
stereotypic movement disorder with self-injury, trichotillomania [hair-pulling
disorder], excoriation [skin-picking] disorder).
Note: ICD-10-CM codes to indicate whether nonsuicidal self-injury is part of the current
clinical presentation (R45.88) and/or whether there has been a prior history of
nonsuicidal
924
self-injury (Z91.52) are available for clinical use to accompany any DSM-5 diagnosis; in
addition, the codes can be recorded in the absence of a DSM-5 diagnosis. The
definition of these codes is included in Section II, “Other Conditions That May Be a
Focus of Clinical Attention” (see “Nonsuicidal Self-Injury”).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of nonsuicidal self-injury disorder is that the individual repeatedly inflicts
minor-to-moderate, often painful injuries to the surface of his or her body without suicidal intent.
Most commonly, the purpose is to reduce negative emotions, such as tension, anxiety, sadness,
or self-reproach, or less often to resolve an interpersonal difficulty. In some cases, the injury is
conceived of as a deserved self-punishment. The individual will often report an immediate
sensation of relief that occurs during the process. When the behavior occurs frequently, it might
be associated with a sense of urgency and craving, the resultant behavioral pattern resembling an
addiction. The inflicted wounds can become deeper and more numerous.
Cutting is the most common method of injury and is most often inflicted with a knife, needle,
razor, or other sharp object. Common areas for injury include the dorsal side of the forearm and
frontal area of the thighs. A single session of injury might involve a series of superficial, parallel
cuts—separated by 1 or 2 centimeters—on a visible or accessible location. The resulting cuts
will often bleed and will often leave a characteristic pattern of scars.
Other relatively common methods used include superficial scratching or burning of the skin,
as well as self-hitting or banging, biting, and interfering with wound healing. Many will use
different methods over time, and use of multiple methods is associated with more severe
