psychopathology, including engagement in suicide attempts.
Many, and possibly most, of those who engage in nonsuicidal self-injury do not seek clinical
attention. This tendency may reflect a reluctance to disclose self-injury due to concerns over
stigma. In addition, many individuals who engage in these behaviors experience them positively
because of the effectiveness of nonsuicidal self-injury in regulating negative emotion, thereby
reducing or eliminating motivation for treatment. Children and adolescents might experiment
with these behaviors but not experience relief. In such cases, youths often report that the
procedure is painful or distressing and might then discontinue the practice.
Associated Features
Nonsuicidal self-injury disorder appears predominantly maintained by negative reinforcement, in
that the behavior is reported to quickly reduce negative emotion and aversive emotional arousal.
Some who engage in the behavior also report that nonsuicidal self-injury can quickly reduce
unwanted dissociative experiences and even suicidal ideation, as well as serve as a way to cope
with trauma-related symptoms such as self-directed anger and/or disgust. However, other forms
of social and emotional reinforcement can also sustain the behavior, such as a desire to elicit
reactions from others or generate positive feelings.
Prevalence
In an international meta-analysis, prevalence of nonsuicidal self-injury disorder was found
overall to be modestly higher in girls/women than in boys/men. This is in contrast to suicidal
behavior, in which the gender ratio of girls/women to boys/men is much higher. The gender
difference for nonsuicidal self-injury disorder is more pronounced in clinical samples. Across
cultural contexts, the gender ratio of nonsuicidal self-injury may vary, being more prevalent
among girls/women in some contexts (e.g., among high school students in rural areas of China)
and among boys/men in others (e.g., among youth ages
925
11–19 in Jordan). Nonsuicidal self-injury disorder is substantially more common among sexual
minorities, especially those who identify as bisexual.
Development and Course
Nonsuicidal self-injury disorder most often starts in the early to mid-teen years and can continue
for many years, with earlier ages at onset being associated with more severe manifestations.
Nonsuicidal self-injury disorder may peak in late adolescence and the early 20s and then decline
into adulthood. Additional prospective research is needed to outline the natural history of
nonsuicidal self-injury disorder and the factors that promote or inhibit its course. Individuals
often learn of the behavior on the recommendation or observation of another, through media
outlets, and through social media. Individuals exposed to others who self-injure, including in
inpatient, school, correctional, and community settings, are more likely to initiate self-injury,
potentially through social modeling or social learning mechanisms.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
