Borderline personality disorder.
Suicidal behavior.
Trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder).
Nonsuicidal self-injury disorder should not be diagnosed if the behavior is motivated by a widely
accepted cultural practice. This is true even if the practice is only carried out by a minority of the
population (e.g., engaging in self-flagellation as a collective activity during religious festivals).
Nonsuicidal self-injury may be a way of expressing group belongingness rather than individual
distress or emotion regulation, as suggested by research with “alternative” (i.e., Goth, Emo, and
Punk) youth groups in Germany, and nonsuicidal self-injury disorder should also not be
diagnosed in such instances.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Because individuals with nonsuicidal self-injury can and do attempt suicide, it is important to
evaluate these individuals for suicide risk and to obtain information from a third party
concerning any recent change in stress exposure and mood. Likelihood of a suicide attempt has
been associated with a history of nonsuicidal self-injury, with the onset of nonsuicidal self-injury
typically preceding suicide attempts by approximately 1–2 years, as shown by research in
clinical and community settings in three high-income countries. The use of multiple previous
methods of nonsuicidal self-injury, high frequencies of self-injurious acts, younger age at onset,
and using nonsuicidal self-injury to obtain relief from internal distress or for self-punishment are
strongly predictive of both suicidal ideation and suicide attempts.
Functional Consequences of Nonsuicidal Self-Injury Disorder
The act of cutting might be performed with shared implements, raising the possibility of blood-
borne disease transmission. Severe burns, infection from poor care of injuries, and permanent
scarring can also result, negatively impacting the individual.
Differential Diagnosis
Many have regarded nonsuicidal self-injury as pathognomonic of
borderline personality disorder. However, although nonsuicidal self-injury disorder is often
comorbid with borderline personality disorder, many individuals with nonsuicidal self-injury
disorder do not have a personality pattern that meets criteria for borderline personality disorder.
Nonsuicidal self-injury disorder not only occurs without borderline personality disorder but
frequently co-occurs with many other disorders, including depressive disorders, eating disorders,
and substance disorders.
926
The differentiation between nonsuicidal self-injury disorder and suicidal
behavior is based on the stated goal of the behavior, either as a wish to die (suicidal behavior) or
to experience relief (as described in the criteria for nonsuicidal self-injury disorder). In contrast
to suicidal behavior, nonsuicidal self-injury episodes are, in the short-term, typically benign in
individuals with a history of frequent episodes. Further, some individuals report using their
nonsuicidal self-injury to avoid attempting suicide.
Trichotillomania is defined by self-injurious behavior
confined to pulling out one’s own hair, most commonly from the scalp, eyebrows, or eyelashes.
The behavior occurs in “sessions” that can last for hours. It is most likely to occur during a
