development of a disorder. It is divided into subsections addressing temperamental factors
(e.g., personality features); environmental factors (e.g., head trauma, emotional trauma,
exposure to toxic substances, substance use); and genetic and physiological factors
27
(e.g., APOE4 for dementia, other known familial genetic risks); this subsection may address
familial patterns (traditional) as well as genetic and epigenetic factors. An additional
subsection for course modifiers includes factors that may incur a deleterious course, and
conversely factors that may have ameliorative or protective effects.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues includes information on variations in symptom
expression, attributions for disorder causes or precipitants, factors associated with
differential prevalence across demographic groups, cultural norms that may affect level of
perceived pathology, risk of misdiagnosis when evaluating individuals from socially
oppressed ethnoracial groups, and other material relevant to culturally informed diagnosis.
Prevalence rates in specific cultural/ethnic groups are located in the Prevalence section.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues includes correlates of the diagnosis that are
related to sex or gender, predominance of symptoms or the diagnosis by sex or gender, and
any other sex- and gender-related diagnostic implications of the diagnosis, such as
differences in the clinical course by sex or gender. Prevalence rates by gender are located in
the Prevalence section.
Diagnostic Markers addresses objective measures that have established diagnostic value.
These may include physical examination findings (e.g., signs of malnutrition in
avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder), laboratory findings (e.g., low CSF hypocretin-1
levels in narcolepsy), or imaging findings (e.g., regionally hypometabolic FDG PET imaging
for neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease).
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior provides information about disorder-
specific prevalence of suicidal thoughts or behavior, as well as risk factors for suicide that
may be associated with the disorder.
Functional Consequences discusses notable functional consequences associated with a
disorder that are likely to have an impact on the daily lives of affected individuals; these
consequences may affect the ability to engage in tasks related to education, work, and
maintaining independent living. These may vary according to age and across the life span.
Differential Diagnosis discusses how to differentiate the disorder from other disorders that
have some similar presenting characteristics.
Comorbidity includes descriptions of mental disorders and other medical conditions (i.e.,
conditions classified outside of the Mental and Behavioral disorders chapter in ICD-10-CM),
likely to co-occur with the diagnosis.
Other Conditions and Disorders in Section II
In addition to providing diagnostic criteria and text for DSM-5 mental disorders, Section II also
includes two chapters for other conditions that are not mental disorders but may be encountered
