by mental health clinicians. These conditions may be listed as a reason for a clinical visit in
addition to, or in place of, the mental disorders in Section II. The chapter “Medication-Induced
Disorders and Other Adverse Effects of Medication” includes medication-induced
parkinsonism, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, medication-induced acute dystonia, medication-
induced acute akathisia, tardive dyskinesia, tardive dystonia/tardive akathisia, medication-
induced postural tremor, antidepressant discontinuation syndrome, and other adverse effect of
medication. These conditions are included in Section II because of their frequent importance in
1) the management by medication of mental disorders or other medical conditions, and 2) the
differential diagnosis with mental disorders (e.g., anxiety disorder vs. medication-induced acute
akathisia).
28
The chapter “Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention” includes
conditions and psychosocial or environmental problems that are not considered to be mental
disorders but otherwise affect the diagnosis, course, prognosis, or treatment of an individual’s
mental disorder. These conditions are presented with their corresponding codes from ICD-10-
CM (usually Z codes). A condition or problem in this chapter may be coded with or without an
accompanying mental disorder diagnosis 1) if it is a reason for the current visit; 2) if it helps to
explain the need for a test, procedure, or treatment; 3) if it plays a role in the initiation or
exacerbation of a mental disorder; or 4) if it constitutes a problem that should be considered in
the overall management plan. These include suicidal behavior and nonsuicidal self-injury; abuse
and neglect; relational problems (e.g., Relationship Distress With Spouse or Intimate Partner);
educational, occupational, housing, and economic problems; problems related to the social
environment, interaction with the legal system, and other psychosocial, personal, and
environmental circumstances (e.g., problems related to unwanted pregnancy, being a victim of
crime or terrorism); problems related to access to medical and other health care; circumstances of
personal history (e.g., Personal History of Psychological Trauma); other health service
encounters for counseling and medical advice (e.g., sex counseling); and additional conditions or
problems that may be a focus of clinical attention (e.g., wandering associated with a mental
disorder, uncomplicated bereavement, phase of life problem).
Online Enhancements
DSM-5-TR is available in online subscriptions at PsychiatryOnline.org, as well as an e-book that
reflects the print edition. The online version provides a complete set of supporting in-text
citations and references not available in print or e-book; it is also updated periodically to reflect
any changes resulting from the DSM-5 iterative revision process, described in the Introduction.
DSM-5 will be retained online in an archived format at PsychiatryOnline.org, joining prior
versions of DSM.
Clinical rating scales and measures in the print edition and e-book (see “Assessment
Measures” in Section III) are included online along with additional assessment measures used in
the field trials (www.psychiatry.org/dsm5), linked to the relevant disorders. From the Section III
chapter “Culture and Psychiatric Diagnosis,” the Cultural Formulation Interview, Cultural
Formulation Interview—Informant Version (both included in print and e-book), and
