Cautionary Statement for Forensic Use
of DSM-5
Although the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria and text are primarily designed to assist
clinicians in conducting clinical assessment, case formulation, and treatment planning, DSM-5 is
also used as a reference for the courts and attorneys in assessing the legal consequences of
mental disorders. As a result, it is important to note that the definition of mental disorder
included in DSM-5 was developed to meet the needs of clinicians, public health professionals,
and research investigators rather than the technical needs of the courts and legal professionals. It
is also important to note that DSM-5 does not provide treatment guidelines for any given
disorder.
When used appropriately, diagnoses and diagnostic information can assist legal decision
makers in their determinations. For example, when the presence of a mental disorder is the
predicate for a subsequent legal determination (e.g., involuntary civil commitment), the use of an
established system of diagnosis enhances the value and reliability of the determination. By
providing a compendium based on a review of the pertinent clinical and research literature,
DSM-5 may facilitate legal decision-makers’ understanding of the relevant characteristics of
mental disorders. The literature related to diagnoses also serves as a check on ungrounded
speculation about mental disorders and about the functioning of a particular individual. Finally,
diagnostic information about longitudinal course may improve decision-making when the legal
issue concerns an individual’s mental functioning at a past or future point in time.
However, the use of DSM-5 in forensic settings should be informed by an awareness of the
risks and limitations of its use. When DSM-5 categories, criteria, and textual descriptions are
employed for forensic purposes, there is a risk that diagnostic information will be misused or
misunderstood. These dangers arise because of the imperfect fit between the questions of
ultimate concern to the law and the information contained in a clinical diagnosis. In most
situations, the clinical diagnosis of a DSM-5 mental disorder such as intellectual developmental
disorder (intellectual disability), schizophrenia, major neurocognitive disorder, gambling
disorder, or pedophilic disorder does not imply that an individual with such a condition meets
legal criteria for the presence of a mental disorder or “mental illness” as defined in law, or a
specified legal standard (e.g., for competence, criminal responsibility, or disability). For the
latter, additional information is usually required beyond that contained in the DSM-5 diagnosis,
which might include information about the individual’s functional impairments and how these
impairments affect the particular abilities in question. It is precisely because impairments,
abilities, and disabilities vary widely within each diagnostic category that assignment of a
particular diagnosis does not imply a specific level of risk, impairment, or disability.
Use of DSM-5 to assess the presence of a mental disorder by nonclinical, nonmedical, or
otherwise insufficiently trained individuals is not advised. Nonclinical decision-makers should
also be cautioned that a diagnosis does not carry any necessary implications regarding the
