Neurodevelopmental Disorders
The neurodevelopmental disorders are a group of conditions with onset in the
developmental period. The disorders typically manifest early in development, often before the
child enters school, and are characterized by developmental deficits or differences in brain
processes that produce impairments of personal, social, academic, or occupational functioning.
The range of developmental deficits or differences varies from very specific limitations of
learning or control of executive functions to global impairments of social skills or intellectual
ability. Once thought to be categorically defined, more recent dimensional approaches to
measurement of the symptoms demonstrate a range of severity, often without a very clear
boundary with typical development. Diagnosis of a disorder thus requires the presence of both
symptoms and impaired function.
The neurodevelopmental disorders frequently co-occur with one another; for example,
individuals with autism spectrum disorder often have intellectual developmental disorder
(intellectual disability), and many children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
also have a specific learning disorder. The neurodevelopmental disorders also frequently co-
occur with other mental and behavioral disorders with onset in childhood (e.g., communication
disorders and autism spectrum disorder may be associated with anxiety disorders; ADHD with
oppositional 
defiant disorder; 
tics 
with 
obsessive-compulsive disorder). 
For some
neurodevelopmental disorders, the clinical presentation includes behaviors that are more frequent
or intense when compared with those of normal children of the same developmental age and
gender, as well as deficits and delays in achieving expected milestones. For example, autism
spectrum disorder is diagnosed only when the characteristic deficits of social communication are
accompanied by excessively repetitive behaviors, restricted interests, and insistence on
sameness.
Intellectual developmental disorder is characterized by deficits in general mental abilities,
such as reasoning, problem solving, planning, abstract thinking, judgment, academic learning,
and learning from experience. The deficits result in impairments of adaptive functioning, such
that the individual fails to meet standards of personal independence and social responsibility in
one or more aspects of daily life, including communication, social participation, academic or
occupational functioning, and personal independence at home or in community settings. Global
developmental delay, as its name implies, is diagnosed when an individual fails to meet expected
developmental milestones in several areas of intellectual functioning. The diagnosis is used for
individuals younger than 5 years who are unable to undergo systematic assessments of
intellectual functioning, and thus the clinical severity level cannot be reliably assessed.
Intellectual developmental disorder may result from an acquired insult during the developmental
period from, for example, a severe head injury, in which case a neurocognitive disorder also may
be diagnosed.
The communication disorders include language disorder, speech sound disorder, social
