(pragmatic) communication disorder, and childhood-onset fluency disorder (stuttering). The first
three disorders are characterized by deficits in the development and use of language, speech, and
social communication, respectively. Social communication disorder is characterized by deficits
in both verbal and nonverbal communication skills that result in
36
social impairment and are not better explained by low abilities in structural language,
intellectual developmental disorder, or autism spectrum disorder. Childhood-onset fluency
disorder is characterized by disturbances of the normal fluency and motor production of speech,
including repetitive sounds or syllables, prolongation of consonants or vowel sounds, broken
words, blocking, or words produced with an excess of physical tension. Like other
neurodevelopmental disorders, communication disorders begin early in life and may produce
lifelong functional impairments.
Autism spectrum disorder is characterized by persistent deficits in social communication and
social interaction across multiple contexts, including deficits in social reciprocity, nonverbal
communicative behaviors used for social interaction, and skills in developing, maintaining, and
understanding relationships. In addition to the social communication deficits, the diagnosis of
autism spectrum disorder requires the presence of restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior,
interests, or activities. Because symptoms change with development and may be masked by
compensatory mechanisms, the diagnostic criteria may be met based on historical information,
although the current presentation must cause significant impairment.
Within the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder, individual clinical characteristics are noted
through the use of specifiers (with or without accompanying intellectual impairment; with or
without accompanying structural language impairment; associated with a known genetic or other
medical condition or environmental factor; associated with a neurodevelopmental, mental, or
behavioral problem), as well as specifiers that describe the severity of autistic symptoms. These
specifiers provide clinicians with an opportunity to individualize the diagnosis and communicate
a richer clinical description of the affected individuals. For example, many individuals
previously diagnosed with Asperger’s disorder would now receive a diagnosis of autism
spectrum disorder without language or intellectual impairment.
ADHD is a neurodevelopmental disorder defined by impairing levels of inattention,
disorganization, and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity. Inattention and disorganization entail inability
to stay on task, seeming not to listen, and losing materials necessary for tasks, at levels that are
inconsistent with age or developmental level. Hyperactivity-impulsivity entails overactivity,
fidgeting, inability to stay seated, intruding into other people’s activities, and inability to wait—
symptoms that are excessive for age or developmental level. In childhood, ADHD frequently
overlaps with disorders that are often considered to be “externalizing disorders,” such as
oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder. ADHD often persists into adulthood, with
resultant impairments of social, academic, and occupational functioning.
Specific learning disorder, as the name implies, is diagnosed when there are specific deficits
in an individual’s ability to perceive or process information for learning academic skills
efficiently and accurately. This neurodevelopmental disorder first manifests during the years of
formal schooling and is characterized by persistent and impairing difficulties with learning
foundational academic skills in reading, writing, and/or math. The individual’s performance of
