the affected academic skills is well below average for age, or acceptable performance levels are
achieved only with extraordinary effort. Specific learning disorder may occur in individuals
identified as intellectually gifted and manifest only when the learning demands or assessment
procedures (e.g., timed tests) pose barriers that cannot be overcome by their innate intelligence
and compensatory strategies. For all individuals, specific learning disorder can produce lifelong
impairments in activities dependent on the skills, including occupational performance.
The neurodevelopmental motor disorders include developmental coordination disorder,
stereotypic movement disorder, and tic disorders. Developmental coordination disorder is
characterized by deficits in the acquisition and execution of coordinated motor skills and is
manifested by clumsiness and slowness or inaccuracy of performance of
37
motor skills that cause interference with activities of daily living. Stereotypic movement
disorder is diagnosed when an individual has repetitive, seemingly driven, and apparently
purposeless motor behaviors, such as hand flapping, body rocking, head banging, self-biting, or
hitting. The movements interfere with social, academic, or other activities. If the behaviors cause
self-injury, this should be specified as part of the diagnostic description. Tic disorders are
characterized by the presence of motor or vocal tics, which are sudden, rapid, recurrent,
nonrhythmic, stereotyped motor movements or vocalizations. The duration, presumed etiology,
and clinical presentation define the specific tic disorder that is diagnosed: Tourette’s disorder,
persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder, provisional tic disorder, other specified tic
disorder, and unspecified tic disorder. Tourette’s disorder is diagnosed when the individual has
multiple motor and vocal tics that have been present for at least 1 year and that have a waxing-
waning symptom course.
The use of specifiers for the neurodevelopmental disorder diagnoses enriches the clinical
description of the individual’s clinical course and current symptomatology. These include the
following: Severity specifiers are available for intellectual developmental disorder, autism
spectrum disorder, ADHD, specific learning disorder, and stereotypic movement disorder.
Specifiers indicative of current symptomatology are available for ADHD, specific learning
disorder, and persistent motor or vocal tic disorder. Autism spectrum disorder and stereotypic
movement disorder also include the specifier “associated with a known genetic or other medical
condition or environmental factor.” This specifier gives clinicians an opportunity to document
factors that may have played a role in the etiology of the disorder, as well as those that might
affect the clinical course.
Intellectual Developmental Disorders
Intellectual Developmental Disorder (Intellectual
Disability)
