money. Caretakers provide
extensive supports for problem
solving throughout life.
Speech and communication are
focused on the here and now
within everyday events. Language
is used for social communication
more than for explication.
Individuals understand simple
speech and gestural
communication. Relationships
with family members and familiar
others are a source of pleasure and
help.
The individual cannot make
responsible decisions regarding
well-being of self or others. In
adulthood, participation in tasks at
home, recreation, and work
requires ongoing support and
assistance. Skill acquisition in all
domains involves long-term
teaching and ongoing support.
Maladaptive behavior, including
self-injury, is present in a
significant minority.
Profound
Conceptual skills generally involve
the physical world rather than
symbolic processes. The individual
may use objects in goal-directed
fashion for self-care, work, and
recreation. Certain visuospatial
skills, such as matching and
sorting based on physical
characteristics, may be acquired.
However, co-occurring motor and
sensory impairments may prevent
functional use of objects.
The individual has very limited
understanding of symbolic
communication in speech or
gesture. He or she may understand
some simple instructions or
gestures. The individual expresses
his or her own desires and
emotions largely through
nonverbal, nonsymbolic
communication. The individual
enjoys relationships with well-
known family members,
caretakers, and familiar others, and
initiates and responds to social
interactions through gestural and
emotional cues. Co-occurring
sensory and physical impairments
may prevent many social
activities.
The individual is dependent on others
for all aspects of daily physical
care, health, and safety, although
he or she may be able to
participate in some of these
activities as well. Individuals
without severe physical
impairments may assist with some
daily work tasks at home, like
carrying dishes to the table. Simple
actions with objects may be the
basis of participation in some
vocational activities with high
levels of ongoing support.
Recreational activities may
involve, for example, enjoyment in
listening to music, watching
movies, going out for walks, or
participating in water activities, all
with the support of others. Co-
occurring physical and sensory
impairments are frequent barriers
to participation (beyond watching)
in home, recreational, and
vocational activities. Maladaptive
behavior is present in a significant
minority.
Specifiers
The various levels of severity are defined on the basis of adaptive functioning, and not IQ scores,
because it is adaptive functioning that determines the level of supports required. Moreover, IQ
measures are less valid in the lower end of the IQ range.
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability) are deficits
in general mental abilities (Criterion A) and impairment in everyday adaptive functioning, in
comparison to an individual’s age-, gender-, and socioculturally matched peers (Criterion B).
Onset is during the developmental period (Criterion C). The diagnosis of intellectual
developmental disorder is based on both clinical assessment and standardized testing of
intellectual functions, standardized neuropsychological tests, and standardized tests of adaptive
functioning.
Criterion A refers to intellectual functions that involve reasoning, problem solving, planning,
abstract thinking, judgment, learning from instruction and experience, and practical
understanding. Critical components include verbal comprehension, working memory, perceptual
