reasoning, quantitative reasoning, abstract thought, and cognitive efficacy. Intellectual
functioning is typically measured with individually administered and psychometrically valid,
comprehensive, and culturally appropriate tests of intelligence. Individuals with intellectual
developmental disorder have scores of approximately two standard deviations or more below the
population mean, including a margin for measurement error (generally ± 5 points). On tests with
a standard deviation of 15 and a mean of 100, this involves a score of 65–75 (70 ± 5). Clinical
training and judgment are required to interpret test results and assess intellectual performance.
Factors that may affect test scores include practice effects (i.e., learning from repeated
testing) and the “Flynn effect” (i.e., overly high scores due to out-of-date test norms). Invalid
scores may result from the use of brief intelligence screening tests or group tests; highly
discrepant individual subtest scores may make an overall IQ score invalid. Instruments must be
normed for the individual’s sociocultural background and native language. Co-occurring
disorders that affect communication, language, and/or motor or sensory function may affect test
scores. Individual cognitive profiles based on neuropsychological testing as well as cross-battery
intellectual assessment (using multiple IQ or other cognitive tests to create a profile) are more
useful for understanding intellectual abilities than a single IQ score.
42
Such testing may identify areas of relative strengths and weaknesses, an assessment
important for academic and vocational planning. IQ test scores are approximations of conceptual
functioning but may be insufficient to assess reasoning in real-life situations and mastery of
practical tasks. For example, a person with deficits in intellectual functioning whose IQ score is
somewhat above 65–75 may nevertheless have such substantial adaptive behavior problems in
social judgment or other areas of adaptive functioning that the person’s actual functioning is
clinically comparable to that of individuals with a lower IQ score. Thus, clinical judgment is
important in interpreting the results of IQ tests, and using them as the sole criteria for the
diagnosis of an intellectual developmental disorder is insufficient.
Deficits in adaptive functioning (Criterion B) refer to how well a person meets community
standards of personal independence and social responsibility, in comparison to others of similar
age and sociocultural background. Adaptive functioning involves adaptive reasoning in three
domains: conceptual, social, and practical. The conceptual (academic) domain involves
competence in memory, language, reading, writing, math reasoning, acquisition of practical
knowledge, problem solving, and judgment in novel situations, among others. The social domain
involves awareness of others’ thoughts, feelings, and experiences; empathy; interpersonal
communication skills; friendship abilities; and social judgment, among others. The practical
domain involves learning and self-management across life settings, including personal care, job
responsibilities, money management, recreation, self-management of behavior, and school and
work task organization, among others. Intellectual capacity, education, motivation, socialization,
personality features, vocational opportunity, cultural experience, and coexisting other medical
conditions or mental disorders influence adaptive functioning.
Adaptive functioning is assessed using both clinical evaluation and individualized, culturally
appropriate, psychometrically sound measures. Standardized measures are used with
knowledgeable informants (e.g., parent or other family member; teacher; counselor; care
provider) and the individual to the extent possible. Additional sources of information include
