educational, developmental, medical, and mental health evaluations. Scores from standardized
measures and interview sources must be interpreted using clinical judgment. When standardized
testing is difficult or impossible, because of a variety of factors (e.g., sensory impairment, severe
problem behavior), the individual may be diagnosed with unspecified intellectual developmental
disorder. Adaptive functioning may be difficult to assess in a controlled setting (e.g., prisons,
detention centers); if possible, corroborative information reflecting functioning outside those
settings should be obtained.
Criterion B is met when at least one domain of adaptive functioning—conceptual, social, or
practical—is sufficiently impaired that ongoing support is needed in order for the person to
perform adequately across multiple environments, such as home, school, work, and community.
Criterion C, onset during the developmental period, refers to recognition that intellectual and
adaptive deficits are present during childhood or adolescence.
A comprehensive evaluation includes an assessment of intellectual capacity and adaptive
functioning; identification of genetic and nongenetic etiologies; evaluation for associated
medical conditions (e.g., cerebral palsy, seizure disorder); and evaluation for co-occurring
mental, emotional, and behavioral disorders. Components of the evaluation may include basic
pre- and perinatal medical history, three-generational family pedigree, physical examination,
genetic evaluation (e.g., karyotype or chromosomal microarray analysis and testing for specific
genetic syndromes), and metabolic screening and neuroimaging assessment.
Associated Features
Intellectual developmental disorder is a heterogeneous condition with multiple causes. There
may be associated difficulties with social judgment; assessment of risk; self-management of
behavior, emotions, or interpersonal relationships; or motivation in school or
43
work environments. Because of a lack of awareness of risk and danger, accidental injury rates
may be increased. Lack of communication skills may predispose to disruptive and aggressive
behaviors. Gullibility is often a feature, involving naiveté in social situations and a tendency for
being easily led by others. Gullibility and lack of awareness of risk may result in exploitation by
others and possible victimization, fraud, unintentional criminal involvement, false confessions,
and risk for physical and sexual abuse. These associated features can be important in criminal
cases, including Atkins-type hearings involving the death penalty.
Beyond deficits in adaptive functioning, individuals also can become distressed about their
intellectual limitations. While such distress may not always be seen as having an impact on
functioning, distress can represent an important feature of the clinical scenario.
Prevalence
Intellectual developmental disorder has an overall general population prevalence of
approximately 10 per 1,000; however, the global prevalence varies by country and level of
development, being approximately 16 per 1,000 in middle-income countries and 9 per 1,000 in
high-income countries. The prevalence also varies by age, being higher in youth than in adults.
In the United States, prevalence per 1,000 population does not vary significantly by ethnoracial
groups.
