Development and Course
Onset of intellectual developmental disorder is in the developmental period. The age and
characteristic features at onset depend on the etiology and severity of brain dysfunction. Delayed
motor, language, and social milestones may be identifiable within the first 2 years of life among
those with more severe intellectual developmental disorder, while mild levels may not be
identifiable until school age when difficulty with academic learning becomes apparent. All
criteria (including Criterion C) must be fulfilled by history or current presentation. Some
children younger than 5 years whose presentation will eventually meet criteria for intellectual
developmental disorder have deficits that meet criteria for global developmental delay.
When intellectual developmental disorder is associated with a genetic syndrome, there may
be a characteristic physical appearance (e.g., as in Down syndrome). Some syndromes have a
behavioral phenotype, which refers to specific behaviors that are characteristic of particular
genetic disorder (e.g., Lesch-Nyhan syndrome). In acquired forms, the onset may be abrupt
following an illness such as meningitis or encephalitis or head trauma occurring during the
developmental period. When intellectual developmental disorder results from a loss of
previously acquired cognitive skills, as in severe traumatic brain injury, the diagnoses of
intellectual developmental disorder and of a neurocognitive disorder may both be assigned.
Although intellectual developmental disorder is generally nonprogressive, in certain genetic
disorders (e.g., Rett syndrome) there are periods of worsening, followed by stabilization, and in
others (e.g., Sanfilippo syndrome, Down syndrome) progressive worsening of intellectual
function in varying degrees. In some cases, the progressive worsening of intellectual functioning
may represent the overlay of neurocognitive disorder that develops in adulthood (i.e., persons
with Down syndrome being at high risk for developing neurocognitive disorder due to
Alzheimer’s disease in adulthood). In this situation, both diagnoses, intellectual developmental
disorder and neurocognitive disorder, are given.
The disorder is generally lifelong, although severity levels may change over time. The course
may be influenced by underlying medical or genetic conditions and co-occurring conditions
(e.g., hearing or visual impairments, epilepsy). Early and ongoing interventions may improve
adaptive functioning throughout childhood and adulthood. In some cases, these result in
significant improvement of intellectual functioning, such that the
44
diagnosis of intellectual developmental disorder is no longer appropriate. Thus, it is common
practice when assessing infants and young children to delay diagnosis of intellectual
developmental disorder until after an appropriate course of intervention is provided. For older
children and adults, the extent of support provided may allow for full participation in all
activities of daily living and improved adaptive function. Diagnostic assessments must determine
whether improved adaptive skills are the result of a stable, generalized new skill acquisition (in
which case the diagnosis of intellectual developmental disorder may no longer be appropriate) or
whether the improvement is contingent on the presence of supports and ongoing interventions (in
which case the diagnosis of intellectual developmental disorder may still be appropriate).
Risk and Prognostic Factors
