Genetic and physiological. Prenatal etiologies include genetic syndromes (e.g., sequence variations
or copy number variants involving one or more genes; chromosomal disorders), inborn errors of
metabolism, brain malformations, maternal disease (including placental disease), and
environmental influences (e.g., alcohol, other drugs, toxins, teratogens). Perinatal causes include
a variety of labor and delivery–related events leading to neonatal encephalopathy. Postnatal
causes include hypoxic ischemic injury, traumatic brain injury, infections, demyelinating
disorders, seizure disorders (e.g., infantile spasms), severe and chronic social deprivation, and
toxic metabolic syndromes and intoxications (e.g., lead, mercury).
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Intellectual developmental disorder occurs across ethnoracial groups. Prevalence differences
across social and cultural contexts may be due to variation in environmental risks (e.g., perinatal
injury, chronic social deprivation) for the disorder that are associated with socioeconomic status
and access to quality health care. For example, in Western Australia, the population prevalence
of intellectual developmental disorder among Aboriginal children is 39 per 1,000 people, as
opposed to 16 per 1,000 for the more affluent non-Aboriginal youth population. Cultural
sensitivity and knowledge of sociostructural conditions are needed during assessment, and the
individual’s socioeconomic, ethnic, cultural, and linguistic background; available experiences;
and adaptive functioning within his or her community and cultural setting must be considered.
Cultural explanations for intellectual developmental disorder vary and may include cultural
beliefs about supernatural influences and punishment for presumed or actual wrongdoing by the
mother or parents, which can be associated with shame and underreporting of the disorder.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Overall, males are more likely than females to be diagnosed with both mild (average male:female
ratio 1.6:1) and severe (average male:female ratio 1.2:1) forms of intellectual developmental
disorder. However, sex ratios vary widely in reported studies. Sex-linked genetic factors, sex
differences in other genetic factors such as specific copy number variants, and male vulnerability
to brain insult may account for some of the sex differences.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Individuals with intellectual developmental disorder can be at risk for suicide associated with
comorbid mental disorder, higher intellectual and adaptive function, and immediate past
stressors. Comorbid mental disorder may manifest atypically in intellectual developmental
disorder; thus, recognizing comorbidity and screening for suicidal thoughts is important in the
assessment process, with particular attention to change in behavior of the individual.
45
Differential Diagnosis
The diagnosis of intellectual developmental disorder should be made whenever Criteria A, B,
and C are met. A diagnosis of intellectual developmental disorder should not be assumed
because of a particular genetic or medical condition. A genetic syndrome linked to intellectual
developmental disorder should be noted as a concurrent diagnosis with the intellectual
