Major and mild neurocognitive disorders.
Communication disorders and specific learning disorder.
Autism spectrum disorder.
developmental disorder.
Intellectual developmental disorder is categorized as a
neurodevelopmental disorder and is distinct from the neurocognitive disorders, which are
characterized by a loss of cognitive functioning. Major neurocognitive disorder may co-occur
with intellectual developmental disorder (e.g., an individual with Down syndrome who develops
Alzheimer’s disease, or an individual with intellectual developmental disorder who loses further
cognitive capacity following a head injury). In such cases, the diagnoses of intellectual
developmental disorder and neurocognitive disorder may both be given. Moreover, when there is
stabilization of cognitive functioning following traumatic or nontraumatic brain injury with onset
in the developmental period (childhood and adolescence), and there is no continuing cognitive
decline, both neurocognitive disorder and intellectual developmental disorder diagnoses can be
used if diagnostic criteria are met for intellectual developmental disorder.
These neurodevelopmental disorders are
specific to the communication and learning domains and do not show deficits in intellectual and
adaptive behavior. They may co-occur with intellectual developmental disorder. Both diagnoses
are made if full criteria are met for intellectual developmental disorder and a communication
disorder or specific learning disorder.
Intellectual developmental disorder is common among individuals with
autism spectrum disorder. Assessment of intellectual ability may be complicated by social-
communication and behavior deficits inherent to autism spectrum disorder, which may interfere
with understanding and complying with test procedures. Appropriate assessment of intellectual
functioning in autism spectrum disorder is essential, with reassessment across the developmental
period, because IQ scores in autism spectrum disorder may be unstable, particularly in early
childhood.
Comorbidity
Co-occurring neurodevelopmental and other mental and medical conditions are frequent in
intellectual developmental disorder, with rates of some conditions (e.g., mental disorders,
cerebral palsy, and epilepsy) three to four times higher than in the general population. The
prognosis and outcome of co-occurring diagnoses may be influenced by the presence of
intellectual developmental disorder. Assessment procedures may require modifications because
of associated disorders, including communication disorders, autism spectrum disorder, and
motor, sensory, or other disorders. Knowledgeable informants are essential for identifying
symptoms such as irritability, mood dysregulation, aggression, eating problems, and sleep
problems, and for assessing adaptive functioning in various community settings.
The most common co-occurring neurodevelopmental and other mental disorders are
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; depressive and bipolar disorders; anxiety disorders;
autism spectrum disorder; stereotypic movement disorder (with or without self-injurious
behavior); impulse-control disorders; and major neurocognitive disorder. Major depressive
disorder may occur throughout the range of severity of intellectual developmental disorder. Self-
injurious behavior requires prompt diagnostic attention and may warrant a separate diagnosis of
stereotypic movement disorder. Individuals with intellectual developmental disorder, particularly
those with more severe intellectual developmental disorder, may also exhibit aggression and
disruptive behaviors, including harm of others or property destruction.
