46
Individuals with intellectual developmental disorder disproportionately have more health
problems, including obesity, than the general population. Frequently they cannot verbalize
physical symptoms they are experiencing. This may lead to health problems being undiagnosed
and untreated.
Relationship to Other Classifications
ICD-11 uses the term disorders of intellectual development to indicate that these are disorders
that involve impaired brain functioning early in life. These disorders are described in ICD-11 as
a metasyndrome occurring in the developmental period analogous to dementia or major
neurocognitive disorder in later life. There are four subtypes of disorders of intellectual
development in ICD-11: mild, moderate, severe, and profound.
The American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities (AAIDD) uses the
term intellectual disability. The AAIDD’s classification is multidimensional rather than
categorical and is based on the disability construct. Rather than listing severity specifiers as is
done in DSM-5, the AAIDD emphasizes a profile of supports based on severity.
Global Developmental Delay
F88
This diagnosis is reserved for individuals under the age of 5 years when the clinical
severity level cannot be reliably assessed during early childhood. This category is
diagnosed when an individual fails to meet expected developmental milestones in
several areas of intellectual functioning, and applies to individuals who are unable to
undergo systematic assessments of intellectual functioning, including children who
are too young to participate in standardized testing. This category requires
reassessment after a period of time.
Unspecified Intellectual Developmental Disorder
(Intellectual Disability)
F79
This category is reserved for individuals over the age of 5 years when assessment of
the degree of intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability) by means of
locally available procedures is rendered difficult or impossible because of associated
sensory or physical impairments, as in blindness or prelingual deafness; locomotor
disability; or presence of severe problem behaviors or co-occurring mental disorder.
This category should only be used in exceptional circumstances and requires
reassessment after a period of time.
