F80.2
Communication Disorders
Disorders of communication include deficits in language, speech, and communication. Speech is
the expressive production of sounds and includes an individual’s articulation, fluency, voice, and
resonance quality. Language includes the form, function, and use of a conventional system of
symbols (i.e., spoken words, sign language, written words, pictures) in a
47
rule-governed manner for communication. Communication includes any verbal or nonverbal
behavior (whether intentional or unintentional) that has the potential to influence the behavior,
ideas, or attitudes of another individual. Assessments of speech, language, and communication
abilities must take into account the individual's cultural and language context, particularly for
individuals growing up in bilingual environments. The standardized measures of language
development and of nonverbal intellectual capacity must be relevant for the cultural and
linguistic group (i.e., tests developed and standardized for one group may not provide
appropriate norms for a different group). The diagnostic category of communication disorders
includes the following: language disorder, speech sound disorder, childhood-onset fluency
disorder (stuttering), social (pragmatic) communication disorder, and unspecified communication
disorders Sex differences in the development of early communication may give rise to higher
prevalence rates of communication disorders in boys compared with girls. Given the associated
features of communication disorders and the relationship of communication to other
developmental domains, communication disorders have high rates of comorbidity with other
neurodevelopmental disorders (e.g., autism spectrum disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD), specific learning disorder, intellectual developmental disorder [intellectual
disability]), mental disorders (e.g., anxiety disorders), and some medical conditions (e.g., seizure
disorders, specific chromosome abnormalities).
Language Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Persistent difficulties in the acquisition and use of language across modalities
(i.e., spoken, written, sign language, or other) due to deficits in comprehension
or production that include the following:
1. Reduced vocabulary (word knowledge and use).
2. Limited sentence structure (ability to put words and word endings together to
form sentences based on the rules of grammar and morphology).
3. Impairments in discourse (ability to use vocabulary and connect sentences to
explain or describe a topic or series of events or have a conversation).
