B. Language abilities are substantially and quantifiably below those expected for
age, resulting in functional limitations in effective communication, social
participation, academic achievement, or occupational performance, individually
or in any combination.
C. Onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period.
D. The difficulties are not attributable to hearing or other sensory impairment, motor
dysfunction, or another medical or neurological condition and are not better
explained by intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability) or global
developmental delay.
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of language disorder are difficulties in the acquisition and use of language
due to deficits in the comprehension or production of vocabulary, grammar, sentence structure,
and discourse. The language deficits are evident in spoken communication, written
communication, or sign language. Language learning and use is dependent on both receptive and
expressive skills. Expressive ability refers to the production of vocal, gestural, or verbal signals,
while receptive ability refers to the process of receiving and comprehending language messages.
Language skills need to be assessed in both expressive and receptive modalities as these may
differ in severity.
Language disorder usually affects vocabulary and grammar, and these effects then limit the
capacity for discourse. The child’s first words and phrases are likely to be delayed
48
in onset; vocabulary size is smaller and less varied than expected; and sentences are shorter
and less complex with grammatical errors, especially in past tense. Deficits in comprehension of
language are frequently underestimated, as children may be good at using context to infer
meaning. There may be word-finding problems, impoverished verbal definitions, or poor
understanding of synonyms, multiple meanings, or word play appropriate for age and culture.
Problems with remembering new words and sentences are manifested by difficulties following
instructions of increasing length, difficulties rehearsing strings of verbal information (e.g.,
remembering a phone number or a shopping list), and difficulties remembering novel sound
sequences, a skill that may be important for learning new words. Difficulties with discourse are
shown by a reduced ability to provide adequate information about the key events and to narrate a
coherent story.
The language difficulty is manifest by abilities substantially and quantifiably below that
expected for age and significantly interfering with academic achievement, occupational
performance, effective communication, or socialization (Criterion B). A diagnosis of language
disorder is made based on the synthesis of the individual’s history, direct clinical observation in
different contexts (i.e., home, school, or work), and scores from standardized tests of language
ability that can be used to guide estimates of severity.
Associated Features
