Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Normal variations in language.
Individuals, even children, can be adept at accommodating to their limited language. They may
appear to be shy or reticent to talk. Affected individuals may prefer to communicate only with
family members or other familiar individuals. Although these social indicators are not diagnostic
of a language disorder, if they are notable and persistent, they warrant referral for a full language
assessment.
Development and Course
Language acquisition is marked by changes from onset in toddlerhood to the adult level of
competency that appears during adolescence. Changes appear across the dimensions of language
(sounds, words, grammar, narratives/expository texts, and conversational skills) in age-graded
increments and synchronies. Language disorder emerges during the early developmental period;
however, there is considerable variation in early vocabulary acquisition and early word
combinations. Individual differences in early childhood are not, as single indicators, highly
predictive of later outcomes, although a late onset of language at age 24 months in a population-
based sample was the best predictor of outcomes at age 7 years. By age 4 years, individual
differences in language ability are more stable, with better measurement accuracy, and are highly
predictive of later outcomes. Language disorder diagnosed in children age 4 years and older is
likely to be stable over time and typically persists into adulthood, although the particular profile
of language strengths and deficits is likely to change over the course of development.
Language disorders can have social consequences across the lifespan. Children with language
disorders are at risk for peer victimization. For females with childhood language disorders, there
could be almost three times the risk compared with unaffected children for sexual assault in
adulthood.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Children with receptive language impairments have a poorer prognosis than those with
predominantly expressive impairments. Receptive language impairments are more resistant to
treatment, and difficulties with reading comprehension are frequently seen.
Bilingualism does not cause or worsen a language disorder, but children who are
bilingual may demonstrate delays or differences in language development. A
49
language disorder in bilingual children will affect both languages; therefore, assessment across
both languages is important to consider.
Language disorders are highly heritable, and family members are more
likely to have a history of language impairment. Population-based twin studies consistently
report substantial heritability for language disorder, and molecular studies suggest multiple genes
interacting on causal pathways.
Differential Diagnosis
Language disorder needs to be distinguished from normal
developmental variations, and this distinction may be difficult to make before age 4 years.
Regional, social, or cultural/ethnic variations of language (e.g., dialects) must be considered
