Hearing or other sensory impairment.
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability).
Autism spectrum disorder.
Neurological disorders.
Language regression.
F80.0
when an individual is being assessed for language impairment.
Hearing impairment needs to be excluded as the primary
cause of language difficulties. Language deficits may be associated with a hearing impairment,
other sensory deficit, or a speech-motor deficit. When language deficits are in excess of those
usually associated with these problems, a diagnosis of language disorder may be made.
Language 
impairment 
is 
often 
the
presenting feature of intellectual developmental disorder. However, the definitive diagnosis of
intellectual developmental disorder may not be made until the child is able to complete
standardized assessments. Language disorder can occur with varying degrees of intellectual
ability, and a discrepancy between verbal and nonverbal ability is not necessary for a diagnosis
of language disorder.
Autism spectrum disorder frequently manifests with delayed language
development. However, autism spectrum disorder is often accompanied by behaviors not present
in language disorder, such as lack of social interest or unusual social interactions (e.g., pulling
individuals by the hand without any attempt to look at them), odd play patterns (e.g., carrying
toys around but never playing with them), unusual communication patterns (e.g., knowing the
alphabet but not responding to own name), and rigid adherence to routines and repetitive
behaviors (e.g., flapping, spinning, echolalia).
Language disorder can be acquired in association with neurological
disorders, including epilepsy (e.g., acquired aphasia or Landau-Kleffner syndrome).
Loss of speech and language in a child at any age warrants thorough
assessment to determine if there is a specific neurological condition, such as Landau-Kleffner
syndrome. Language loss may be a symptom of seizures, and a diagnostic assessment is
necessary to exclude the presence of epilepsy (e.g., routine and sleep electroencephalogram).
Declines in critical social and communication behaviors during the first 2 years of life are
evident in most children presenting with autism spectrum disorder and should signal the need for
autism spectrum disorder assessment.
Comorbidity
Language disorder may be associated with other neurodevelopmental disorders in terms of
specific learning disorder (literacy and numeracy), intellectual developmental disorder, attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, autism spectrum disorder, and developmental coordination
disorder. It is also associated with social (pragmatic) communication disorder. In clinical
samples, language disorder may co-occur with speech sound disorder, although data from a large
population-based sample of 6-year-old children in the United States suggest comorbidity might
be rare (1.3%). A positive family history of speech or language disorders is often present.
50
Speech Sound Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
