A. Persistent difficulty with speech sound production that interferes with speech
intelligibility or prevents verbal communication of messages.
B. The disturbance causes limitations in effective communication that interfere with
social participation, academic achievement, or occupational performance,
individually or in any combination.
C. Onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period.
D. The difficulties are not attributable to congenital or acquired conditions, such as
cerebral palsy, cleft palate, deafness or hearing loss, traumatic brain injury, or
other medical or neurological conditions.
Diagnostic Features
Speech sound production describes the clear articulation of the phonemes (i.e., individual
sounds) that in combination make up spoken words. Speech sound production requires both the
phonological knowledge of speech sounds and the ability to coordinate the movements of the
articulators (i.e., the jaw, tongue, and lips,) with breathing and vocalizing for speech. Children
with speech production difficulties may experience difficulty with phonological knowledge of
speech sounds or the ability to coordinate movements for speech in varying degrees. A speech
sound disorder is diagnosed when speech sound production is not what would be expected based
on the child’s age and developmental stage and when the deficits are not the result of a physical,
structural, neurological, or hearing impairment. Among typically developing children at age 3
years, overall speech should be intelligible, whereas at age 2 years, only 50% may be
understandable. Boys are more likely (range of 1.5–1.8 to 1.0) to have a speech sound disorder
than girls.
Associated Features
Language disorder may be found to co-occur with speech sound disorder, although co-
occurrences are rare by age 6 years. A positive family history of speech or language disorders is
often present.
If the ability to rapidly coordinate the articulators is a particular aspect of difficulty, there
may be a history of delay or incoordination in acquiring skills that also utilize the articulators and
related facial musculature; among others, these skills include chewing, maintaining mouth
closure, and blowing the nose. Other areas of motor coordination may be impaired as in
developmental coordination disorder. The terms childhood apraxia of speech and verbal
dyspraxia are used for speech production problems with motor components.
Development and Course
Learning to produce speech sounds clearly and accurately and learning to produce connected
speech fluently are developmental skills. Articulation of speech sounds follows a developmental
pattern, which is reflected in the age norms of standardized tests. It is not unusual for typically
developing children to use developmental processes for shortening words and syllables as they
are learning to talk, but their progression in mastering speech sound production should result in
mostly intelligible speech by age 3 years. Children with speech sound disorder continue to use
