Normal variations in speech.
Hearing or other sensory impairment.
Structural deficits.
Dysarthria.
Selective mutism.
immature phonological simplification processes past the age when most children can produce
words clearly.
Most speech sounds should be produced clearly and most words should be pronounced
accurately according to age and community norms by age 5 years. The most
51
frequently misarticulated sounds in English also tend to be learned later, leading them to be
called the “late eight” (l, r, s, z, th, ch, dzh, and zh). Misarticulation of any of these sounds by
itself could be considered within normal limits up to age 8 years; however, when multiple sounds
are involved, it is important to target some of those sounds as part of a plan to improve
intelligibility, rather than waiting until the age at which almost all children can produce them
accurately. Lisping (i.e., misarticulating sibilants) is particularly common and may involve
frontal or lateral patterns of airstream direction. It may be associated with a tongue-thrust
swallowing pattern.
Most children with speech sound disorder respond well to treatment, and speech difficulties
improve over time, and thus the disorder may not be lifelong. However, when a language
disorder is also present, the speech disorder has a poorer prognosis and may be associated with
specific learning disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Regional, social, or cultural/ethnic variations of speech should be
considered before making the diagnosis. Bilingual children may demonstrate an overall lower
intelligibility rating, make more overall consonant and vowel errors, and produce more
uncommon error patterns than monolingual English-speaking children when assessed only in
English.
Those who are deaf or hard of hearing may have speech
sound production errors. When speech deficits are in excess of those usually associated with
these problems, a diagnosis of speech sound disorder may be made.
Speech impairment may be due to structural deficits (e.g., cleft palate).
Speech impairment may be attributable to a motor disorder, such as cerebral palsy.
Neurological signs, as well as distinctive features of voice, differentiate dysarthria from speech
sound disorder, although in young children (under 3 years) differentiation may be difficult,
particularly when there is no or minimal general body motor involvement (as in, e.g., Worster-
Drought syndrome).
Limited use of speech may be a sign of selective mutism, an anxiety disorder
that is characterized by a lack of speech in one or more contexts or settings. Selective mutism
may develop in children with a speech disorder because of embarrassment about their
impairments, but many children with selective mutism exhibit normal speech in “safe” settings,
such as at home or with close friends.
Comorbidity
Speech may be differentially impaired in certain genetic conditions (e.g., Down syndrome, 22q
deletion, FoxP2 gene mutation). If present, these should also be coded.
