F80.81
Childhood-Onset Fluency Disorder (Stuttering)
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Disturbances in the normal fluency and time patterning of speech that are
inappropriate for the individual’s age and language skills, persist over time, and
are characterized by frequent and marked occurrences of one (or more) of the
following:
1. Sound and syllable repetitions.
2. Sound prolongations of consonants as well as vowels.
52
3. Broken words (e.g., pauses within a word).
4. Audible or silent blocking (filled or unfilled pauses in speech).
5. Circumlocutions (word substitutions to avoid problematic words).
6. Words produced with an excess of physical tension.
7. Monosyllabic whole-word repetitions (e.g., “I-I-I-I see him”).
B. The disturbance causes anxiety about speaking or limitations in effective
communication, social participation, or academic or occupational performance,
individually or in any combination.
C. The onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period. (Note: Later-onset
cases are diagnosed as F98.5 adult-onset fluency disorder.)
D. The disturbance is not attributable to a speech-motor or sensory deficit,
dysfluency associated with neurological insult (e.g., stroke, tumor, trauma), or
another medical condition and is not better explained by another mental
disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of childhood-onset fluency disorder (stuttering) is a disturbance in the
normal fluency and time patterning of speech that is inappropriate for the individual’s age. This
disturbance is characterized by frequent repetitions or prolongations of sounds or syllables and
by other types of speech dysfluencies, including broken words (e.g., pauses within a word),
audible or silent blocking (i.e., filled or unfilled pauses in speech), circumlocutions (i.e., word
substitutions to avoid problematic words), words produced with an excess of physical tension,
and monosyllabic whole-word repetitions (e.g., “I-I-I-I see him”). The disturbance in fluency
may interfere with academic or occupational achievement and with social communication. The
extent of the disturbance varies from situation to situation and often is more severe when there is
special pressure to communicate (e.g., giving a report at school, interviewing for a job).
Dysfluency is often absent during oral reading, singing, or talking to inanimate objects or to pets.
