Genetic and physiological.
Associated Features
Fearful anticipation of the problem may develop. The speaker may attempt to avoid dysfluencies
by linguistic mechanisms (e.g., altering the rate of speech, avoiding certain words or sounds) or
by avoiding certain speech situations, such as telephoning or public speaking. In addition to
being features of the condition, stress and anxiety have been shown to exacerbate dysfluency.
Childhood-onset fluency disorder may also be accompanied by motor movements (e.g., eye
blinks, tics, tremors of the lips or face, jerking of the head, breathing movements, fist clenching).
Children with fluency disorder show a range of language abilities, and the relationship between
fluency disorder and language abilities is unclear.
Studies have shown both structural and functional neurological differences in children who
stutter. Males are more likely to stutter than females, with estimates varying depending on the
age and possible cause of stuttering. Causes of stuttering are multifactorial, including certain
genetic and neurophysiological factors.
Development and Course
Childhood-onset fluency disorder, or developmental stuttering, occurs by age 6 for 80%–90% of
affected individuals, with age at onset ranging from 2 to 7 years. The onset can be insidious or
more sudden. Typically, dysfluencies start gradually, with repetition of initial consonants, first
words of a phrase, or long words. The child may not be aware of dysfluencies. As the disorder
progresses, the dysfluencies become more frequent and interfering, occurring on the most
meaningful words or phrases in the utterance. As the child becomes aware of the speech
difficulty, he or she may develop mechanisms for avoiding the
53
dysfluencies and emotional responses, including avoidance of public speaking and use of short
and simple utterances. Longitudinal research shows that 65%–85% of children recover from the
dysfluency, with severity of fluency disorder at age 8 years predicting recovery or persistence
into adolescence and beyond.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
The risk of stuttering among first-degree biological relatives of
individuals with childhood-onset fluency disorder is more than three times the risk in the general
population. To date, mutations of four genes that underlie some cases of stuttering have been
identified.
Functional Consequences of Childhood-Onset Fluency Disorder
(Stuttering)
In addition to being features of the condition, stress and anxiety can exacerbate dysfluency.
Impairment of social functioning may result from this anxiety. Negative communication attitudes
may be a functional consequence of stuttering starting in the preschool years and increasing with
age.
Differential Diagnosis
