Sensory deficits.
Normal speech dysfluencies.
Specific learning disorder, with impairment in reading.
Bilingualism.
Medication side effects.
Adult-onset dysfluencies.
Tourette’s disorder.
F80.82
Dysfluencies of speech may be associated with a hearing impairment or other
sensory deficit or a speech-motor deficit. When the speech dysfluencies are in excess of those
usually associated with these problems, a diagnosis of childhood-onset fluency disorder may be
made.
The disorder must be distinguished from normal dysfluencies that
occur frequently in young children, which include whole-word or phrase repetitions (e.g., “I
want, I want ice cream”), incomplete phrases, interjections, unfilled pauses, and parenthetical
remarks. If these difficulties increase in frequency or complexity as the child grows older, a
diagnosis of childhood-onset fluency disorder may be appropriate.
Children who have dysfluencies when they
read aloud may be diagnosed mistakenly as having a reading disorder. Oral reading fluency
typically is measured by timed assessments. Slower reading rates may not accurately reflect the
actual reading ability of children who stutter.
It is necessary to distinguish between dysfluencies resulting from attempts to learn
a new language and dysfluencies that indicate a fluency disorder, which typically appear in both
languages.
Stuttering may occur as a side effect of medication and may be detected
by a temporal relationship with exposure to the medication.
If onset of dysfluencies is during or after adolescence, it is an “adult-
onset dysfluency” rather than a neurodevelopmental disorder. Adult-onset dysfluencies are
associated with specific neurological insults and a variety of medical conditions and mental
disorders and may be specified with them, but they are not a DSM-5 diagnosis.
Vocal tics and repetitive vocalizations of Tourette’s disorder should be
distinguishable from the repetitive sounds of childhood-onset fluency disorder by their nature
and timing.
Comorbidity
Childhood-onset fluency disorder can co-occur with other disorders, such as attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, autism spectrum disorder, intellectual developmental
54
disorder (intellectual disability), language disorder or specific learning disorder, seizure
disorders, social anxiety disorder, speech sound disorder, and other developmental disorders.
Social (Pragmatic) Communication Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Persistent difficulties in the social use of verbal and nonverbal communication as
manifested by all of the following:
