1. Deficits in using communication for social purposes, such as greeting and
sharing information, in a manner that is appropriate for the social context.
2. Impairment of the ability to change communication to match context or the
needs of the listener, such as speaking differently in a classroom than on a
playground, talking differently to a child than to an adult, and avoiding use of
overly formal language.
3. Difficulties following rules for conversation and storytelling, such as taking
turns in conversation, rephrasing when misunderstood, and knowing how to
use verbal and nonverbal signals to regulate interaction.
4. Difficulties understanding what is not explicitly stated (e.g., making
inferences) and nonliteral or ambiguous meanings of language (e.g., idioms,
humor, metaphors, multiple meanings that depend on the context for
interpretation).
B. The deficits result in functional limitations in effective communication, social
participation, social relationships, academic achievement, or occupational
performance, individually or in combination.
C. The onset of the symptoms is in the early developmental period (but deficits may
not become fully manifest until social communication demands exceed limited
capacities).
D. The symptoms are not attributable to another medical or neurological condition
or to low abilities in the domains of word structure and grammar, and are not
better explained by autism spectrum disorder, intellectual developmental
disorder (intellectual disability), global developmental delay, or another mental
disorder.
Diagnostic Features
Social (pragmatic) communication disorder is characterized by a primary difficulty with
pragmatics (i.e., the social use of language and communication), as manifested by deficits in
understanding and following social rules of both verbal and nonverbal communication in
naturalistic contexts, changing language according to the needs of the listener or situation, and
following rules for conversations and storytelling. The deficits in social communication result in
functional limitations in effective communication, social participation, development of social
relationships, academic achievement, or occupational performance. The deficits are not better
explained by low abilities in the domains of structural language or cognitive ability or by autism
spectrum disorder.
Associated Features
The most common associated feature of social (pragmatic) communication disorder is language
impairment, which is characterized by a history of delay in reaching language milestones, and
historical, if not current, structural language problems (see “Language Disorder” earlier in this
chapter). Individuals with social communication deficits may
