Genetic and physiological.
Autism spectrum disorder.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
55
avoid social interactions. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), emotional and
behavioral problems, and specific learning disorders are also more common among affected
individuals.
Development and Course
Because social (pragmatic) communication depends on adequate developmental progress in
speech and language, diagnosis of social (pragmatic) communication disorder is rare among
children younger than 4 years. By age 4 or 5 years, most children should possess adequate
speech and language abilities to permit identification of specific deficits in social
communication. Milder forms of the disorder may not become apparent until early adolescence,
when language and social interactions become more complex.
The outcome of social (pragmatic) communication disorder is variable, with some children
improving substantially over time and others continuing to have difficulties persisting into
adulthood. Even among those who have significant improvements, the early deficits in
pragmatics may cause lasting impairments in social relationships and behavior and also low
performance of other related skills, such as written expression, reading comprehension, and oral
reading.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
A family history of autism spectrum disorder, communication
disorders, or specific learning disorder appears to increase the risk for social (pragmatic)
communication disorder; this includes siblings of children with these disorders who may present
with early symptoms of social (pragmatic) communication disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Autism spectrum disorder is the primary diagnostic consideration for
individuals presenting with social communication deficits. The two disorders can be
differentiated by the presence in autism spectrum disorder of restricted/repetitive patterns of
behavior, interests, or activities and their absence in social (pragmatic) communication disorder.
Individuals with autism spectrum disorder may only display the restricted/repetitive patterns of
behavior, interests, and activities during the early developmental period, so a comprehensive
history should be obtained. Current absence of symptoms would not preclude a diagnosis of
autism spectrum disorder, if the restricted interests and repetitive behaviors were present in the
past. A diagnosis of social (pragmatic) communication disorder should be considered only if the
current symptoms or developmental history fails to reveal evidence of symptoms that meet the
diagnostic criteria for restricted/repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities of autism
spectrum disorder (i.e., Criterion B) causing current impairment. The social communication
symptoms may be milder in social (pragmatic) communication disorder than in autism spectrum
disorder, although qualitatively similar.
Primary deficits of ADHD may cause impairments in social
communication and functional limitations of effective communication, social participation, or
academic achievement.
