Social anxiety disorder.
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability) and global developmental delay.
F84.0
The symptoms of social (pragmatic) communication disorder overlap with
those of social anxiety disorder. The differentiating feature is the timing of the onset of
symptoms. In social (pragmatic) communication disorder, the individual has never had effective
social communication; in social anxiety disorder, the social communication skills developed
appropriately but are not utilized because of anxiety, fear, or distress about social interactions.
56
Social
communication skills may be deficient among individuals with global developmental delay or
intellectual developmental disorder, but a separate diagnosis is not given unless the social
communication deficits are clearly in excess of the intellectual limitations.
Unspecified Communication Disorder
F80.9
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of
communication disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not
meet the full criteria for communication disorder or for any of the disorders in the
neurodevelopmental disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified communication
disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to specify
the reason that the criteria are not met for communication disorder or for a specific
neurodevelopmental disorder, and includes presentations in which there is
insufficient information to make a more specific diagnosis.
Autism Spectrum Disorder
Autism Spectrum Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Persistent deficits in social communication and social interaction across multiple
contexts, as manifested by all of the following, currently or by history (examples
are illustrative, not exhaustive; see text):
1. Deficits in social-emotional reciprocity, ranging, for example, from abnormal
social approach and failure of normal back-and-forth conversation; to reduced
sharing of interests, emotions, or affect; to failure to initiate or respond to
