social interactions.
2. Deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviors used for social interaction,
ranging, for example, from poorly integrated verbal and nonverbal
communication; to abnormalities in eye contact and body language or deficits
in understanding and use of gestures; to a total lack of facial expressions and
nonverbal communication.
3. Deficits in developing, maintaining, and understanding relationships, ranging,
for example, from difficulties adjusting behavior to suit various social contexts;
to difficulties in sharing imaginative play or in making friends; to absence of
interest in peers.
B. Restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities, as manifested
by at least two of the following, currently or by history (examples are illustrative,
not exhaustive; see text):
1. Stereotyped or repetitive motor movements, use of objects, or speech (e.g.,
simple motor stereotypies, lining up toys or flipping objects, echolalia,
idiosyncratic phrases).
57
2. Insistence on sameness, inflexible adherence to routines, or ritualized
patterns of verbal or nonverbal behavior (e.g., extreme distress at small
changes, difficulties with transitions, rigid thinking patterns, greeting rituals,
need to take same route or eat same food every day).
3. Highly restricted, fixated interests that are abnormal in intensity or focus (e.g.,
strong attachment to or preoccupation with unusual objects, excessively
circumscribed or perseverative interests).
4. Hyper- or hyporeactivity to sensory input or unusual interest in sensory
aspects of the environment (e.g., apparent indifference to pain/temperature,
adverse response to specific sounds or textures, excessive smelling or
touching of objects, visual fascination with lights or movement).
C. Symptoms must be present in the early developmental period (but may not
become fully manifest until social demands exceed limited capacities, or may be
masked by learned strategies in later life).
D. Symptoms cause clinically significant impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of current functioning.
E. These disturbances are not better explained by intellectual developmental
disorder (intellectual disability) or global developmental delay. Intellectual
developmental disorder and autism spectrum disorder frequently co-occur; to
make comorbid diagnoses of autism spectrum disorder and intellectual
developmental disorder, social communication should be below that expected for
general developmental level.
Note: Individuals with a well-established DSM-IV diagnosis of autistic disorder,
Asperger’s disorder, or pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified
