should be given the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder. Individuals who have
marked deficits in social communication, but whose symptoms do not otherwise
meet criteria for autism spectrum disorder, should be evaluated for social
(pragmatic) communication disorder.
Specify current severity based on social communication impairments and restricted,
repetitive patterns of behavior (see Table 2):
Requiring very substantial support
Requiring substantial support
Requiring support
Specify if:
With or without accompanying intellectual impairment
With or without accompanying language impairment
Specify if:
Associated with a known genetic or other medical condition or
environmental factor (Coding note: Use additional code to identify the
associated genetic or other medical condition.)
Associated with a neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral problem
Specify if:
With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental
disorder, p. 135, for definition) (Coding note: Use additional code F06.1
catatonia associated with autism spectrum disorder to indicate the presence of
the comorbid catatonia.)
58
TABLE 2 Severity levels for autism spectrum disorder (examples of level of
support needs)
Severity level
Social communication
Restricted, repetitive behaviors
Level 3
“Requiring very substantial
support”
Severe deficits in verbal and nonverbal social
communication skills cause severe impairments
in functioning, very limited initiation of social
interactions, and minimal response to social
overtures from others. For example, a person
with few words of intelligible speech who rarely
initiates interaction and, when he or she does,
makes unusual approaches to meet needs only
and responds to only very direct social
approaches.
Inflexibility of behavior, extreme difficulty
coping with change, or other
restricted/repetitive behaviors markedly
interfere with functioning in all spheres.
Great distress/difficulty changing focus or
action.
Level 2
“Requiring substantial
support”
Marked deficits in verbal and nonverbal social
communication skills; social impairments
apparent even with supports in place; limited
initiation of social interactions; and reduced or
abnormal responses to social overtures from
others. For example, a person who speaks
simple sentences, whose interaction is limited to
narrow special interests, and who has markedly
Inflexibility of behavior, difficulty coping
with change, or other restricted/repetitive
behaviors appear frequently enough to be
obvious to the casual observer and
interfere with functioning in a variety of
contexts. Distress and/or difficulty
changing focus or action.
