odd nonverbal communication.
Level 1
“Requiring support”
Without supports in place, deficits in social
communication cause noticeable impairments.
Difficulty initiating social interactions, and clear
examples of atypical or unsuccessful responses
to social overtures of others. May appear to
have decreased interest in social interactions.
For example, a person who is able to speak in
full sentences and engages in communication
but whose to-and-fro conversation with others
fails, and whose attempts to make friends are
odd and typically unsuccessful.
Inflexibility of behavior causes significant
interference with functioning in one or
more contexts. Difficulty switching
between activities. Problems of
organization and planning hamper
independence.
Recording Procedures
It may be helpful to note level of support needed for each of the two core psychopathological
domains in Table 2 (e.g., “requiring very substantial support for deficits in social communication
and requiring substantial support for restricted, repetitive behaviors”). Specification of “with
accompanying intellectual impairment” or “without accompanying
59
intellectual impairment” should be recorded next. Language impairment specification should be
recorded thereafter. If there is accompanying language impairment, the current level of verbal
functioning should be recorded (e.g., “with accompanying language impairment—no intelligible
speech” or “with accompanying language impairment—phrase speech”).
For autism spectrum disorder for which the specifiers “associated with a known genetic or
other medical condition or environmental factor” or “associated with a neurodevelopmental,
mental, or behavioral problem” are appropriate, record autism spectrum disorder associated with
(name of condition, disorder, or factor) (e.g., autism spectrum disorder associated with tuberous
sclerosis complex). These specifiers apply to presentations in which the listed condition or
problem is potentially relevant to the clinical care of the individual and do not necessarily
indicate that the condition or problem is causally related to the autism spectrum disorder. If the
associated neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral problem meets criteria for a
neurodevelopmental or other mental disorder, both autism spectrum disorder and the other
disorder should be diagnosed.
If catatonia is present, record separately “catatonia associated with autism spectrum
disorder.” For more information, see criteria for catatonia associated with another mental
disorder in the chapter “Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders.”
Specifiers
The severity specifiers (see Table 2) may be used to describe succinctly the current
symptomatology (which might fall below level 1), with the recognition that severity may vary by
context and fluctuate over time. Severity of social communication difficulties and restricted,
repetitive behaviors should be separately rated. The descriptive severity categories should not be
used to determine eligibility for and provision of services. Indeed, individuals with relatively
better skills overall may experience different or even greater psychosocial challenges. Thus,
service needs can only be developed at an individual level and through discussion of personal
priorities and targets.
