Regarding the specifier “with or without accompanying intellectual impairment,”
understanding the (often uneven) intellectual profile of a child or adult with autism spectrum
disorder is necessary for interpreting diagnostic features. Separate estimates of verbal and
nonverbal skill are necessary (e.g., using untimed nonverbal tests to assess potential strengths in
individuals with limited language).
To use the specifier “with or without accompanying language impairment,” the current level
of verbal functioning should be assessed and described. Examples of the specific descriptions for
“with accompanying language impairment” might include no intelligible speech (nonverbal),
single words only, or phrase speech. Language level in individuals “without accompanying
language impairment” might be further described as speaks in full sentences or has fluent speech.
Since receptive language may lag behind expressive language development in autism spectrum
disorder, receptive and expressive language skills should be considered separately.
The specifier “associated with a known genetic or other medical condition or environmental
factor” can be applied when an individual has a known genetic condition (e.g., Rett syndrome,
fragile X syndrome, Down syndrome), a known medical condition (e.g., epilepsy), or a history of
environmental exposure in utero to a known teratogen or infection (e.g., fetal valproate
syndrome, fetal alcohol syndrome, fetal rubella). This specifier should not be viewed as
synonymous with causation of autism spectrum disorder. A condition may be listed as being
associated with autism spectrum disorder when it is thought to be potentially clinically relevant
or inform care and not because the clinician is asserting a cause. Examples include autism
spectrum disorder associated with a unique genomic copy number variant that could be clinically
relevant even if the specific abnormality may not have directly caused nor have previously been
linked to autism spectrum disorder, or Crohn’s disease, which could exacerbate behavioral
symptoms.
60
The specifier “associated with a neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral problem” can be
applied to indicate problems (e.g., irritability, sleep problems, self-injurious behavior, or
developmental regression) that contribute to the functional formulation or are a focus of
treatment. Additional neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral disorders should also be noted
as separate diagnoses (e.g., attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; developmental coordination
disorder; disruptive behavior, impulse-control, and conduct disorders; anxiety, depressive, or
bipolar disorders; tics or Tourette’s disorder; feeding, elimination, or sleep disorders).
Catatonia can occur as a comorbid condition with autism spectrum disorder. In addition to
classic symptoms of posturing, negativism (opposition or no response to instructions or external
stimuli), mutism, and stupor, an increase or worsening of stereotypy and self-injurious behavior
may form part of the symptom complex of catatonia in the setting of autism spectrum disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of autism spectrum disorder are persistent impairment in reciprocal social
communication and social interaction (Criterion A), and restricted, repetitive patterns of
behavior, interests, or activities (Criterion B). These symptoms are present from early childhood
and limit or impair everyday functioning (Criteria C and D). The stage at which functional
impairment becomes obvious will vary according to characteristics of the individual and his or
