her environment. Core diagnostic features are evident in the developmental period, but
intervention, compensation, and current supports may mask difficulties in at least some contexts.
Manifestations of the disorder also vary greatly depending on the severity of the autistic
condition, developmental level, chronological age, and possibly gender; hence, the term
spectrum. Individuals without cognitive or language impairment may have more subtle
manifestation of deficits (e.g., Criterion A, Criterion B) than individuals with accompanying
intellectual or language impairments and may be making great efforts to mask these deficits.
Criterion A deficits in social communication will be more subtle if an individual has better
overall communication skills (e.g., is verbally fluent, does not have intellectual impairments).
Similarly, Criterion B deficits (i.e., restricted patterns of behavior and interests) may be less
obvious if the interests are closer to age-typical norms (e.g., Ancient Egypt or trains as compared
to wiggling a string). Autism spectrum disorder encompasses disorders previously referred to as
early infantile autism, childhood autism, Kanner’s autism, high-functioning autism, atypical
autism, pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified, childhood disintegrative
disorder, and Asperger’s disorder.
The impairments in social communication and social interaction specified in Criterion A are
pervasive and sustained. Diagnoses are most valid and reliable when based on multiple sources
of information, including clinician’s observations, caregiver history, and, when possible, self-
report. Verbal and nonverbal deficits in social communication have varying manifestations,
depending on the individual’s age, intellectual level, and language ability, as well as other factors
such as treatment history and current support. Many individuals have language deficits, ranging
from complete lack of speech through language delays, poor comprehension of speech, echoed
speech, or stilted and overly literal language. Even when formal language skills (e.g.,
vocabulary, grammar) are intact, the use of language for reciprocal social communication is
impaired in autism spectrum disorder.
Deficits in social-emotional reciprocity (i.e., the ability to engage with others and share
thoughts and feelings) may be shown, for example, in young children with little or no initiation
of social interaction and no sharing of emotions, along with reduced or absent imitation of
others’ behavior. What language exists is often one-sided, lacking in social reciprocity, and used
to request or label rather than to comment, share feelings, or converse. In older children and
adults without intellectual impairments or language delays, deficits in
61
social-emotional reciprocity may be most apparent in difficulties processing and responding
to complex social cues (e.g., when and how to join a conversation, what not to say). Individuals
who have developed compensation strategies for some social challenges still struggle in novel or
unsupported situations and suffer from the effort and anxiety of consciously calculating what is
socially intuitive for most individuals. This behavior may contribute to lower ascertainment of
autism spectrum disorder in these individuals, perhaps especially in adult women. Thus, longer
assessments, observation in naturalistic settings, and inquiring about any tolls of social
interaction may be needed. If asked about the costs of social interaction, for example, these
individuals might respond that social interactions are exhausting for them, that they are unable to
concentrate because of the mental effort in monitoring social conventions, that their self-esteem
is adversely affected by being unable to be themselves, and so forth.
