Deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviors used for social interaction are manifested by
absent, reduced, or atypical use of eye contact (relative to cultural norms), gestures, facial
expressions, body orientation, or speech intonation. An early feature of autism spectrum disorder
is impaired joint attention as manifested by a lack of pointing, showing, or bringing objects to
share interest with others, or failure to follow someone’s pointing or eye gaze. Individuals may
learn a few functional gestures, but their repertoire is smaller than that of others, and they often
fail to use expressive gestures spontaneously in communication. Among young people and adults
with fluent language, the difficulty in coordinating nonverbal communication with speech may
give the impression of odd, wooden, or exaggerated “body language” during interactions.
Impairment may be relatively subtle within individual modes (e.g., someone may have relatively
good eye contact when speaking) but noticeable in poor integration of eye contact, gesture, body
posture, prosody, and facial expression for social communication, or in difficulty maintaining
these for sustained periods or when under stress.
Deficits in developing, maintaining, and understanding relationships should be judged
against norms for age, gender, and culture. There may be absent, reduced, or atypical social
interest, manifested by rejection of others, passivity, or inappropriate approaches that seem
aggressive or disruptive. These difficulties are particularly evident in young children, in whom
there is often a lack of shared social play and imagination (e.g., age-appropriate flexible pretend
play) and, later, insistence on playing by very fixed rules. Older individuals may struggle to
understand what behavior is considered appropriate in one situation but not another (e.g., casual
behavior during a job interview), or the different ways that language may be used to
communicate (e.g., irony, white lies). There may be an apparent preference for solitary activities
or for interacting with much younger or older people. Frequently, there is a desire to establish
friendships without a complete or realistic idea of what friendship entails (e.g., one-sided
friendships or friendships based solely on shared special interests). Relationships with siblings,
coworkers, and caregivers are also important to consider (in terms of reciprocity).
Autism spectrum disorder is also defined by restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior,
interests, or activities (as specified in Criterion B), which show a range of manifestations
according to age and ability, intervention, and current supports. Stereotyped or repetitive
behaviors include simple motor stereotypies (e.g., hand flapping, finger flicking), repetitive use
of objects (e.g., spinning coins, lining up toys), and repetitive speech (e.g., echolalia, the delayed
or immediate parroting of heard words; use of “you” when referring to self; stereotyped use of
words, phrases, or prosodic patterns). Excessive adherence to routines and restricted patterns of
behavior may be manifest in resistance to change (e.g., distress at apparently small changes, such
as taking an alternative route to school or work; insistence on adherence to rules; rigidity of
thinking) or ritualized patterns of verbal or nonverbal behavior (e.g., repetitive questioning,
pacing a perimeter). Highly restricted, fixated interests in autism spectrum disorder tend to be
abnormal in intensity or focus (e.g., a toddler strongly attached to a pan or piece of string; a child
preoccupied with vacuum
62
cleaners; an adult spending hours writing out timetables). Some fascinations and routines
may relate to apparent hyper- or hyporeactivity to sensory input, manifested through extreme
responses to specific sounds or textures, excessive smelling or touching of objects, fascination
