with lights or spinning objects, and sometimes apparent indifference to pain, heat, or cold.
Extreme reaction to or rituals involving taste, smell, texture, or appearance of food or excessive
food restrictions are common and may be a presenting feature of autism spectrum disorder.
Many individuals with autism spectrum disorder without intellectual or language
impairments learn to suppress repetitive behavior in public. In these individuals, repetitive
behaviors like rocking or finger flicking may serve an anxiolytic or self-soothing function.
Special interests may be a source of pleasure and motivation and provide avenues for
education and employment later in life. Diagnostic criteria may be met when restricted, repetitive
patterns of behavior, interests, or activities were clearly present during childhood or at some time
in the past, even if symptoms are no longer present.
Criterion D requires that the features must cause clinically significant impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of current functioning. Criterion E specifies that the social
communication deficits, although sometimes accompanied by intellectual developmental
disorder (intellectual disability), are not in line with the individual’s developmental level;
impairments exceed difficulties expected on the basis of developmental level.
Standardized behavioral diagnostic instruments with good psychometric properties, including
caregiver interviews, questionnaires and clinician observation measures, are available and can
improve reliability of diagnosis over time and across clinicians. However, the symptoms of
autism spectrum disorder occur as dimensions without universally accepted cutoff scores for
what would constitute a disorder. Thus, the diagnosis remains a clinical one, taking all available
information into account, and is not solely dictated by the score on a particular questionnaire or
observation measure.
Associated Features
Many individuals with autism spectrum disorder also have intellectual and/or language
impairment (e.g., slow to talk, language comprehension behind production). Even those with
average or high intelligence usually have an uneven profile of abilities. The gap between
intellectual and adaptive functional skills is often large. It is common for individuals with autism
to have theory-of-mind deficits (i.e., to have difficulty seeing the world from another person’s
perspective), but these are not necessarily present in all cases. Executive function deficits are
also common but not specific, as are difficulties with central coherence (i.e., being able to
understand context or to “see the big picture,” and thus tending to overfocus on detail).
Motor deficits are often present, including odd gait, clumsiness, and other abnormal motor
signs (e.g., walking on tiptoes). Self-injury (e.g., head banging, biting the wrist) may occur, and
disruptive/challenging behaviors are more common in children and adolescents with autism
spectrum disorder than other disorders, including intellectual developmental disorder. Some
individuals develop catatonic-like motor behavior (slowing and “freezing” mid-action), but these
are typically not of the magnitude of a catatonic episode. However, it is possible for individuals
with autism spectrum disorder to experience a marked deterioration in motor symptoms and
display a full catatonic episode with symptoms such as mutism, posturing, grimacing, and waxy
flexibility. The risk period for comorbid catatonia appears to be greatest in the adolescent years.
Prevalence
Frequencies for autism spectrum disorder across the United States have been reported to be
