between 1% and 2% of the population, with similar estimates in child and adult
63
samples. However, prevalence appears to be lower among U.S. African American (1.1%) and
Latinx children (0.8%) compared with White children (1.3%), even after the effect of
socioeconomic resources is taken into account. The reported prevalence of autism spectrum
disorder may be affected by misdiagnosis, delayed diagnosis, or underdiagnosis of individuals
from some ethnoracial backgrounds. Prevalence across non-U.S. countries has approached 1% of
the population (0.62% median global prevalence), without substantial variation based on
geographic region or ethnicity and across child and adult samples. Globally, the male:female
ratio in well-ascertained epidemiological samples appears to be 3:1, with concerns about
underrecognition of autism spectrum disorder in women and girls.
Development and Course
The age and pattern of onset also should be noted for autism spectrum disorder. The behavioral
features of autism spectrum disorder first become evident in early childhood, with some cases
presenting a lack of interest in social interaction in the first year of life. Symptoms are typically
recognized during the second year of life (age 12–24 months) but may be seen earlier than 12
months if developmental delays are severe, or noted later than 24 months if symptoms are more
subtle. The pattern of onset description might include information about early developmental
delays or any losses of social or language skills. In cases where skills have been lost, parents or
caregivers may give a history of a gradual or relatively rapid deterioration in social behaviors or
language skills. Typically, this would occur between ages 12 and 24 months.
Prospective studies demonstrate that in most cases the onset of autism spectrum disorder is
associated with declines in critical social and communication behaviors in the first 2 years of life.
Such declines in functioning are rare in other neurodevelopmental disorders and may be an
especially useful indicator of the presence of autism spectrum disorder. In rare cases, there is
developmental regression occurring after at least 2 years of normal development (previously
described as childhood disintegrative disorder), which is much more unusual and warrants more
extensive medical investigation (i.e., continuous spike and waves during slow-wave sleep
syndrome and Landau-Kleffner syndrome). Often included in these encephalopathic conditions
are losses of skills beyond social communication (e.g., loss of self-care, toileting, motor skills)
(see also Rett syndrome in the section “Differential Diagnosis” for this disorder).
First symptoms of autism spectrum disorder frequently involve delayed language
development, often accompanied by lack of social interest or unusual social interactions (e.g.,
pulling individuals by the hand without any attempt to look at them), odd play patterns (e.g.,
carrying toys around but never playing with them), and unusual communication patterns (e.g.,
knowing the alphabet but not responding to own name). Deafness may be suspected but is
typically ruled out. During the second year, odd and repetitive behaviors and the absence of
typical play become more apparent. Since many typically developing young children have strong
preferences and enjoy repetition (e.g., eating the same foods, watching the same video multiple
times), distinguishing restricted and repetitive behaviors that are diagnostic of autism spectrum
disorder can be difficult in preschoolers. The clinical distinction is based on the type, frequency,
and intensity of the behavior (e.g., a child who daily lines up objects for hours and is very
