Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
A variety of risk factors for neurodevelopmental disorders, such as advanced
parental age, extreme prematurity, or in utero exposures to certain drugs or teratogens like
valproic acid, may broadly contribute to risk of autism spectrum disorder.
Heritability estimates for autism spectrum disorder have ranged from
37% to higher than 90%, based on twin concordance rates, and a more recent five-country cohort
estimated heritability at 80%. Currently, as many as 15% of cases of autism spectrum disorder
appear to be associated with a known genetic mutation, with different de novo copy number
variants or de novo mutations in specific genes associated with the disorder in different families.
However, even when a known genetic mutation is associated with autism spectrum disorder, it
does not appear to be fully penetrant (i.e., not all individuals with that same genetic abnormality
will develop autism spectrum disorder). Risk for the majority of cases appears to be polygenic,
with perhaps hundreds of genetic loci making relatively small contributions. Whether these
findings apply to all racial/ethnic populations equally is unclear, given the limited inclusion of
communities of color in genetic research.
65
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Cultural differences exist in norms for social interaction, nonverbal communication, and
relationships, but individuals with autism spectrum disorder are markedly impaired against the
norms for their cultural context. Culture influences the perception of autistic behaviors, the
perceived salience of some behaviors over others, and the expectations for child behavior and
parenting practices. Considerable discrepancies are found in age at diagnosis of autism spectrum
disorder in children from diverse ethnoracial backgrounds; most studies find delayed diagnosis
among socially oppressed ethnic and racialized children. In addition to being diagnosed later,
African American children are more often misdiagnosed with adjustment or conduct disorder
than are White children.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Autism spectrum disorder is diagnosed three to four times more often in males than in females,
and on average, age at diagnosis is later in females. In clinic samples, females tend to be more
likely to show accompanying intellectual developmental disorder as well as epilepsy, suggesting
that girls without intellectual impairments or language delays may go unrecognized, perhaps
because of subtler manifestation of social and communication difficulties. In comparison with
males with autism spectrum disorder, females may have better reciprocal conversation, and be
more likely to share interests, to integrate verbal and nonverbal behavior, and to modify their
behavior by situation, despite having similar social understanding difficulties as males.
Attempting to hide or mask autistic behavior (e.g., by copying the dress, voice, and manner of
socially successful women) may also make diagnosis harder in some females. Repetitive
behaviors may be somewhat less evident in females than in males, on average, and special
interests may have a more social (e.g., a singer, an actor) or “normative” focus (e.g., horses),
while remaining unusual in their intensity. Relative to the general population, rates of gender
variance have been reported to be increased in autism spectrum disorder, with higher variance in
females compared with males.
