Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability) without autism spectrum disorder.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Individuals with autism spectrum disorder are at greater risk for suicide death compared with
those without autism spectrum disorder. Children with autism spectrum disorder who had
impaired social communication had a higher risk of self-harm with suicidal intent, suicidal
thoughts, and suicide plans by age 16 years as compared with those without impaired social
communication. Adolescents and young adults with autism spectrum disorder have an increased
risk of suicide attempts compared with age- and sex-matched control subjects, even after
adjustments for demographic factors and psychiatric comorbidities.
Functional Consequences of Autism Spectrum Disorder
In young children with autism spectrum disorder, lack of social and communication abilities may
hamper learning, especially learning through social interaction or in settings with peers. In the
home, insistence on routines and aversion to change, as well as sensory sensitivities, may
interfere with eating and sleeping and make routine care (e.g., haircuts, dental work) extremely
difficult. Adaptive skills are typically below measured IQ. Extreme difficulties in planning,
organization, and coping with change negatively impact academic achievement, even for
students with above-average intelligence. During adulthood, these individuals may have
difficulties establishing independence because of continued rigidity and difficulty with novelty.
Many individuals with autism spectrum disorder, even without intellectual developmental
disorder, have poor adult psychosocial functioning as indexed by measures such
66
as independent living and gainful employment. Functional consequences in old age are
unknown, but social isolation and communication problems (e.g., reduced help-seeking) are
likely to have consequences for health in older adulthood.
Co-occurring intellectual developmental disorder, epilepsy, mental disorders, and chronic
medical conditions may be associated with a higher risk of premature mortality for individuals
with autism spectrum disorder. Deaths from injury and poisoning are higher than for the general
population, as are deaths from suicide. Drowning is the leading cause of accidental death in
children with autism spectrum disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Abnormalities of attention (overly focused or easily
distracted) are common in individuals with autism spectrum disorder, as is hyperactivity.
Moreover, some individuals with ADHD may exhibit social communication deficits such as
interrupting others, speaking too loudly, and not respecting personal space. Although potentially
difficult to discriminate ADHD from autism spectrum disorder, the developmental course and
absence of restricted, repetitive behaviors and unusual interests in ADHD help in differentiating
the two conditions. A concurrent diagnosis of ADHD should be considered when attentional
difficulties or hyperactivity exceeds that typically seen in individuals of comparable mental age,
and ADHD is one of the most common comorbidities in autism spectrum disorder.
Intellectual
developmental disorder without autism spectrum disorder may be difficult to differentiate from
