Language disorders and social (pragmatic) communication disorder.
Selective mutism.
Stereotypic movement disorder.
Rett syndrome.
Symptoms associated with anxiety disorders.
autism spectrum disorder in very young children. Individuals with intellectual developmental
disorder who have not developed language or symbolic skills also present a challenge for
differential diagnosis, since repetitive behavior often occurs in such individuals as well. A
diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder in an individual with intellectual developmental disorder
is appropriate when social communication and interaction are significantly impaired relative to
the developmental level of the individual’s nonverbal skills (e.g., fine motor skills, nonverbal
problem solving). In contrast, intellectual developmental disorder is the appropriate diagnosis
when there is no apparent discrepancy between the level of social communicative skills and other
intellectual skills.
In some forms of language
disorder, there may be problems of communication and some secondary social difficulties.
However, specific language disorder is not usually associated with abnormal nonverbal
communication, nor with the presence of restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or
activities.
When an individual shows impairment in social communication and social interactions but
does not show restricted and repetitive behavior or interests, criteria for social (pragmatic)
communication disorder, instead of autism spectrum disorder, may be met. The diagnosis of
autism spectrum disorder supersedes that of social (pragmatic) communication disorder
whenever the criteria for autism spectrum disorder are met, and care should be taken to enquire
carefully regarding past or current restricted/repetitive behavior.
In selective mutism, early development is not typically disturbed. The affected
child usually exhibits appropriate communication skills in certain contexts and settings. Even in
settings where the child is mute, social reciprocity is not impaired, nor are restricted or repetitive
patterns of behavior present.
Motor stereotypies are among the diagnostic characteristics of
autism spectrum disorder, so an additional diagnosis of stereotypic movement disorder is not
given when such repetitive behaviors are better explained by the presence
67
of autism spectrum disorder. However, when stereotypies cause self-injury and become a focus
of treatment, both diagnoses may be appropriate.
Disruption of social interaction may be observed during the regressive phase of
Rett syndrome (typically between ages 1 and 4 years); thus, a substantial proportion of affected
young girls may have a presentation that meets diagnostic criteria for autism spectrum disorder.
However, after this period, most individuals with Rett syndrome improve their social
communication skills, and autistic features are no longer a major area of concern. Consequently,
autism spectrum disorder should be considered only when all diagnostic criteria are met.
The overlap of anxiety symptoms with the core
symptoms of autism spectrum disorder can make the classification of anxiety symptoms in
autism spectrum disorder challenging. For example, social withdrawal and repetitive behaviors
are core features of autism spectrum disorder but may also be expressions of anxiety. The most
common anxiety disorders in autism spectrum disorder are specific phobia (in up to 30% of
cases), and social anxiety and agoraphobia (in as many as 17% of cases).
