Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Schizophrenia.
Personality disorders.
Repetitive behavior is a defining feature of both obsessive-
compulsive disorder and autism spectrum disorder. In both conditions, repetitive behaviors are
considered to be inappropriate or odd. In obsessive-compulsive disorder, intrusive thoughts are
often related to contamination, organization, or sexual or religious themes. Compulsions are
performed in response to these intrusive thoughts in attempts to relieve anxiety. In autism
spectrum disorder, repetitive behaviors classically include more stereotyped motor behaviors,
such as hand flapping and finger shaking or more complex behaviors, such as insistence on
routines or lining up objects. Contrary to obsessive-compulsive disorder, repetitive behaviors in
autism spectrum disorder may be perceived as pleasurable and reinforcing.
Schizophrenia with childhood onset usually develops after a period of normal, or
near normal, development. A prodromal state has been described in which social impairment and
atypical interests and beliefs occur, which could be confused with the social deficits and
restricted fixated interests seen in autism spectrum disorder. Hallucinations and delusions, which
are defining features of schizophrenia, are not features of autism spectrum disorder. However,
clinicians must take into account the potential for individuals with autism spectrum disorder to
be concrete in their interpretation of questions regarding the key features of schizophrenia (e.g.,
“Do you hear voices when no one is there?” ”Yes [on the radio]”). Autism spectrum disorder and
schizophrenia can co-occur, and both should be diagnosed when criteria are met.
In adults without intellectual developmental disorder or significant
language impairment, some behaviors associated with autism spectrum disorder may be
perceived by others as symptoms of narcissistic, schizotypal, or schizoid personality disorder.
Schizotypal personality disorder in particular may intersect with autism spectrum disorder in
unusual preoccupations and perceptual experiences, odd thinking and speech, constricted affect
and social anxiety, lack of close friends, and odd or eccentric behavior. The early developmental
course of autism spectrum disorder (lack of imaginative play, restricted/repetitive behavior,
sensory sensitivities) is most helpful in differentiating it from personality disorders.
Comorbidity
Autism spectrum disorder is frequently associated with intellectual developmental disorder and
language disorder (i.e., an inability to comprehend and construct sentences with proper
grammar). Specific learning difficulties (literacy and numeracy) are common, as is
developmental coordination disorder.
68
Psychiatric comorbidities also co-occur in autism spectrum disorder. About 70% of
individuals with autism spectrum disorder may have one comorbid mental disorder, and 40%
may have two or more comorbid mental disorders. Anxiety disorders, depression, and ADHD are
particularly common. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder is a fairly frequent presenting
feature of autism spectrum disorder, and extreme and narrow food preferences may persist.
Among individuals who are nonverbal or have language deficits, observable signs such as
changes in sleep or eating and increases in challenging behavior should trigger an evaluation for
anxiety or depression, as well as for potential pain or discomfort from undiagnosed medical or
dental problems. Medical conditions commonly associated with autism spectrum disorder
