social, academic, or occupational functioning.
E. The symptoms do not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia or
another psychotic disorder and are not better explained by another mental
disorder (e.g., mood disorder, anxiety disorder, dissociative disorder, personality
disorder, substance intoxication or withdrawal).
Specify whether:
F90.2 Combined presentation: If both Criterion A1 (inattention) and Criterion
A2 (hyperactivity-impulsivity) are met for the past 6 months.
F90.0 Predominantly inattentive presentation: If Criterion A1 (inattention) is
met but Criterion A2 (hyperactivity-impulsivity) is not met for the past 6 months.
F90.1 Predominantly hyperactive/impulsive presentation: If Criterion A2
(hyperactivity-impulsivity) is met and Criterion A1 (inattention) is not met for the
past 6 months.
Specify if:
In partial remission: When full criteria were previously met, fewer than the full
criteria have been met for the past 6 months, and the symptoms still result in
impairment in social, academic, or occupational functioning.
70
Specify current severity:
Mild: Few, if any, symptoms in excess of those required to make the diagnosis
are present, and symptoms result in no more than minor impairments in social or
occupational functioning.
Moderate: Symptoms or functional impairment between “mild” and “severe” are
present.
Severe: Many symptoms in excess of those required to make the diagnosis, or
several symptoms that are particularly severe, are present, or the symptoms
result in marked impairment in social or occupational functioning.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a persistent pattern of
inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes with functioning or development.
Inattention manifests behaviorally in ADHD as wandering off task, failing to follow through on
instructions or finishing work or chores, having difficulty sustaining focus, and being
disorganized and is not attributable to defiance or lack of comprehension. Hyperactivity refers to
excessive motor activity (such as a child running about) when it is not appropriate, or excessive
fidgeting, tapping, or talkativeness. In adults, hyperactivity may manifest as extreme restlessness
or wearing others out with their activity. Impulsivity refers to hasty actions that occur in the
moment without forethought, which may have potential for harm to the individual (e.g., darting
into the street without looking). Impulsivity may reflect a desire for immediate rewards or an
inability to delay gratification. Impulsive behaviors may manifest as social intrusiveness (e.g.,
