interrupting others excessively) and/or as making important decisions without consideration of
long-term consequences (e.g., taking a job without adequate information).
ADHD begins in childhood. The requirement that several symptoms be present before age 12
years conveys the importance of a substantial clinical presentation during childhood. At the same
time, an earlier age at onset is not specified because of difficulties in establishing precise
childhood onset retrospectively. Adult recall of childhood symptoms tends to be unreliable, and
it is beneficial to obtain ancillary information. ADHD cannot be diagnosed in the absence of any
symptoms prior to age 12. When symptoms of what appears to be ADHD first occur after age 13,
they are more likely to be explained by another mental disorder or to represent the cognitive
effects of substance use.
Manifestations of the disorder must be present in more than one setting (e.g., home and
school, or home and work). Confirmation of substantial symptoms across settings typically
cannot be done accurately without consulting informants who have seen the individual in those
settings. Typically, symptoms vary depending on context within a given setting. Signs of the
disorder may be minimal or absent when the individual is receiving frequent rewards for
appropriate behavior, is under close supervision, is in a novel setting, is engaged in especially
interesting activities, has consistent external stimulation (e.g., via electronic screens), or is
interacting in one-on-one situations (e.g., the clinician's office).
Associated Features
Delays in language, motor, or social development are not specific to ADHD but often co-occur.
Emotional dysregulation or emotional impulsivity commonly occurs in children and adults with
ADHD. Individuals with ADHD self-report and are described by others as being quick to anger,
easily frustrated, and overreactive emotionally.
Even in the absence of a specific learning disorder, academic or work performance is often
impaired. Individuals with ADHD may exhibit neurocognitive deficits in a variety of areas,
including working memory, set shifting, reaction time variability, response inhibition, vigilance,
and planning/organization, although these tests are not sufficiently sensitive or specific to serve
as diagnostic indices.
71
Although ADHD is not associated with specific physical features, rates of minor physical
anomalies (e.g., hypertelorism, highly arched palate, low-set ears) may be elevated. Subtle motor
delays and other neurological soft signs may occur. (Note that marked co-occurring clumsiness
and motor delays should be coded separately [e.g., developmental coordination disorder].)
Children with neurodevelopmental disorders with a known cause (e.g., fragile X syndrome,
22q11 
deletion 
syndrome) 
may 
often 
also 
have 
symptoms 
of 
inattention 
and
impulsivity/hyperactivity; they should receive an ADHD diagnosis if their symptoms meet the
full criteria for the disorder.
Prevalence
Population surveys suggest that ADHD occurs worldwide in about 7.2% of children; however,
cross-national prevalence ranges widely, from 0.1% to 10.2% of children and adolescents.
Prevalence is higher in special populations such as foster children or correctional settings. In a
