Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Course modifiers.
cross-national meta-analysis, ADHD occurred in 2.5% of adults.
Development and Course
Many parents first observe excessive motor activity when the child is a toddler, but symptoms
are difficult to distinguish from highly variable normative behaviors before age 4 years. ADHD
is most often identified during elementary school years when inattention becomes more
prominent and impairing. The disorder is relatively stable through early adolescence, but some
individuals have a worsened course with development of antisocial behaviors. In most
individuals with ADHD, symptoms of motoric hyperactivity become less obvious in adolescence
and adulthood, but difficulties with restlessness, inattention, poor planning, and impulsivity
persist. A substantial proportion of children with ADHD remain relatively impaired into
adulthood.
In preschool, the main manifestation is hyperactivity. Inattention becomes more prominent
during elementary school. During adolescence, signs of hyperactivity (e.g., running and
climbing) are less common and may be confined to fidgetiness or an inner feeling of jitteriness,
restlessness, or impatience. In adulthood, along with inattention and restlessness, impulsivity
may remain problematic even when hyperactivity has diminished.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
ADHD is associated with reduced behavioral inhibition, effortful control, or
constraint; negative emotionality; and/or elevated novelty seeking. These traits may predispose
some children to ADHD but are not specific to the disorder.
Very low birth weight and degree of prematurity convey a greater risk for
ADHD; the more extreme the low weight, the greater the risk. Prenatal exposure to smoking is
associated with ADHD even after controlling for parental psychiatric history and socioeconomic
status. A minority of cases may be related to reactions to aspects of diet. Neurotoxin exposure
(e.g., lead), infections (e.g., encephalitis), and alcohol exposure in utero have been correlated
with subsequent ADHD, but it is not known whether these associations are causal.
The heritability of ADHD is approximately 74%. Large-scale genome-
wide association studies (GWAS) have identified a number of loci enriched in evolutionarily
constrained genomic regions and loss-of-function genes as well as around brain-expressed
regulatory regions. There is no single gene for ADHD.
Visual and hearing impairments, metabolic abnormalities, and nutritional deficiencies should
be considered as possible influences on ADHD symptoms. ADHD is elevated in individuals with
idiopathic epilepsy.
72
Family interaction patterns in early childhood are unlikely to cause ADHD but
may influence its course or contribute to secondary development of conduct problems.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Differences in ADHD prevalence across regions appear attributable mainly to different
diagnostic procedures and methodological practices, including using different diagnostic
