interviews and differences in whether functional impairment was required and, if so, how it was
defined. Prevalence is also affected by cultural variation in attitudes toward behavioral norms
and expectations of children and youth in different social contexts, as well as cultural differences
in interpretations of children’s behaviors by parents and teachers, including differences by
gender. Clinical identification rates in the United States for African American and Latinx
populations tend to be lower than for non-Latinx White populations. Underdetection may result
from mislabeling of ADHD symptoms as oppositional or disruptive in socially oppressed ethnic
or racialized groups because of explicit or implicit clinician bias, leading to overdiagnosis of
disruptive disorders. Higher prevalence in non-Latinx White youth may also be influenced by
greater parental demand for diagnosis of behaviors seen as ADHD-related. Informant symptom
ratings may be influenced by the cultural background of the child and the informant, suggesting
that culturally competent diagnostic practices are relevant in assessing ADHD.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
ADHD is more frequent in males than in females in the general population, with a ratio of
approximately 2:1 in children and 1.6:1 in adults. Females are more likely than males to present
primarily with inattentive features. Sex differences in ADHD symptom severity may be due to
differing genetic and cognitive liabilities between sexes.
Diagnostic Markers
No biological marker is diagnostic for ADHD. Although ADHD has been associated with
elevated power of slow waves (4–7 Hz “theta”) as well as decreased power of fast waves (14–30
Hz “beta”), a later review found no differences in theta or beta power in either children or adults
with ADHD relative to control subjects.
Although some neuroimaging studies have shown differences in children with ADHD
compared with control subjects, meta-analysis of all neuroimaging studies do not show
differences between individuals with ADHD and control subjects. This likely is due to
differences in diagnostic criteria, sample size, task used, and technical aspects of the
neuroimaging technique. Until these issues are resolved, no form of neuroimaging can be used
for diagnosis of ADHD.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
ADHD is a risk factor for suicidal ideation and behavior in children. Similarly, in adulthood,
ADHD is associated with an increased risk of suicide attempt, when comorbid with mood,
conduct, or substance use disorders, even after controlling for comorbidity. Suicidal thoughts are
also more common in ADHD populations than in non-ADHD control subjects. ADHD predicted
persistence of suicidal thoughts in U.S. Army soldiers.
Functional Consequences of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
ADHD is associated with reduced school performance and academic attainment. Academic
deficits, school-related problems, and peer neglect tend to be most associated with elevated
73
symptoms of inattention, whereas peer rejection and, to a lesser extent, accidental injury are most
