Oppositional defiant disorder.
Intermittent explosive disorder.
Other neurodevelopmental disorders.
salient with marked symptoms of hyperactivity or impulsivity. Inadequate or variable self-
application to tasks that require sustained effort is often interpreted by others as laziness,
irresponsibility, or failure to cooperate.
Young adults with ADHD have poor job stability. Adults with ADHD show poorer
occupational performance, attainment, attendance, and higher probability of unemployment, as
well as elevated interpersonal conflict. On average, individuals with ADHD obtain less
schooling, have poorer vocational achievement, and have reduced intellectual scores than their
peers, although there is great variability. In its severe form, the disorder is markedly impairing,
affecting social, familial, and scholastic/occupational adjustment.
Family relationships may be characterized by discord and negative interactions. Individuals
with ADHD have lower self-esteem relative to peers without ADHD. Peer relationships are often
disrupted by peer rejection, neglect, or teasing of the individual with ADHD.
Children with ADHD are significantly more likely than their peers without ADHD to
develop conduct disorder in adolescence and antisocial personality disorder in adulthood,
consequently increasing the likelihood for substance use disorders and incarceration. The risk of
subsequent substance use disorders is elevated, especially when conduct disorder or antisocial
personality disorder develops.
Individuals with ADHD are more likely than peers to be injured. Children and adults with
ADHD are at higher risk for suffering trauma and developing subsequent posttraumatic stress
syndrome. Traffic accidents and violations are more frequent in drivers with ADHD. Individuals
with ADHD have a higher overall mortality rate, largely because of accidents and injuries. There
may also be an elevated likelihood of obesity and hypertension among individuals with ADHD.
Differential Diagnosis
Individuals with oppositional defiant disorder may resist work or
school tasks that require self-application because they resist conforming to others' demands.
Their behavior is characterized by negativity, hostility, and defiance. These symptoms must be
differentiated from aversion to school or mentally demanding tasks because of difficulty in
sustaining mental effort, forgetting instructions, and impulsivity in individuals with ADHD.
Complicating the differential diagnosis is the fact that some individuals with ADHD may
develop secondary oppositional attitudes toward such tasks and devalue their importance.
ADHD and intermittent explosive disorder share high levels of
impulsive behavior. However, individuals with intermittent explosive disorder show serious
aggression toward others, which is not characteristic of ADHD, and they do not experience
problems with sustaining attention as seen in ADHD. In addition, intermittent explosive disorder
is rare in childhood. Intermittent explosive disorder may be diagnosed in the presence of ADHD.
The increased motoric activity that may occur in ADHD must
be distinguished from the repetitive motor behavior that characterizes stereotypic movement
disorder and some cases of autism spectrum disorder. In stereotypic movement disorder, the
motoric behavior is generally fixed and repetitive (e.g., body rocking, self-biting), whereas the
fidgetiness and restlessness in ADHD are typically generalized and not characterized by
repetitive stereotypic movements. In Tourette’s disorder, frequent multiple tics can be mistaken
for the generalized fidgetiness of ADHD. Prolonged observation may be needed to differentiate
fidgetiness from bouts of multiple tics.
