Specific learning disorder.
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability).
Autism spectrum disorder.
Reactive attachment disorder.
Anxiety disorders.
Posttraumatic stress disorder.
Depressive disorders.
Bipolar disorder.
Children with specific learning disorder alone may appear inattentive
because of frustration, lack of interest, or limited ability in neurocognitive
74
processes, including working memory and processing speed, whereas their inattention is much
reduced when performing a skill that does not require the impaired cognitive process.
Symptoms of ADHD are common in
children with intellectual developmental disorder placed in academic settings that are
inappropriate to their intellectual ability. In such cases, the symptoms are not evident during
nonacademic tasks. A diagnosis of ADHD in intellectual developmental disorder requires that
inattention or hyperactivity be excessive for mental age.
Individuals with ADHD and those with autism spectrum disorder
exhibit inattention, social dysfunction, and difficult-to-manage behavior. The social dysfunction
and peer rejection seen in individuals with ADHD must be distinguished from the social
disengagement, isolation, and indifference to facial and tonal communication cues seen in
individuals with autism spectrum disorder. Children with autism spectrum disorder may display
tantrums because of an inability to tolerate a change from their expected course of events. In
contrast, children with ADHD may misbehave or have a tantrum during a major transition
because of impulsivity or poor self-control.
Children with reactive attachment disorder may show social
disinhibition, but not the full ADHD symptom cluster, and display other features such as a lack
of enduring relationships that are not characteristic of ADHD.
ADHD shares symptoms of inattention with anxiety disorders. Individuals
with ADHD are inattentive because of their preferential engagement with novel and stimulating
activities or preoccupation with enjoyable activities. This is distinguished from the inattention
attributable to worry and rumination seen in anxiety disorders. Restlessness might be seen in
anxiety disorders. However, in ADHD, the symptom is not associated with worry and
rumination.
Concentration difficulties associated with posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) may be misdiagnosed in children as ADHD. Children younger than 6 years
often manifest PTSD in nonspecific symptoms such as restlessness, irritability, inattention, and
poor concentration, which can mimic ADHD. Parents may also minimize their children’s
trauma-related symptoms, and teachers and other caregivers are often unaware of the child’s
exposure to traumatic events. A comprehensive assessment of past exposure to traumatic events
can rule out PTSD.
Individuals with depressive disorders may present with inability to
concentrate. However, poor concentration in mood disorders becomes prominent only during a
depressive episode.
Individuals with bipolar disorder may have increased activity, poor
concentration, and increased impulsivity, but these features are episodic, unlike ADHD, in which
the symptoms are persistent. Moreover, in bipolar disorder, increased impulsivity or inattention
is accompanied by elevated mood, grandiosity, and other specific bipolar features. Children with
