Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
Substance use disorders.
Personality disorders.
Psychotic disorders.
Medication-induced symptoms of ADHD.
Neurocognitive disorders.
ADHD may show significant changes in mood within the same day; such lability is distinct from
a manic or hypomanic episode, which must last 4 or more days to be a clinical indicator of
bipolar disorder, even in children. Bipolar disorder is rare in preadolescents, even when severe
irritability and anger are prominent, whereas ADHD is common among children and adolescents
who display excessive anger and irritability.
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is characterized by
pervasive irritability, and intolerance of frustration, but impulsiveness and disorganized attention
are not essential features. However, most children and adolescents with the disorder also have
symptoms that meet criteria for ADHD, which is diagnosed separately.
Differentiating ADHD from substance use disorders may be problematic
if the first presentation of ADHD symptoms follows the onset of abuse or
75
frequent use. Clear evidence of ADHD before substance misuse from informants or previous
records may be essential for differential diagnosis.
In adolescents and adults, it may be difficult to distinguish ADHD from
borderline, narcissistic, and other personality disorders. Some personality disorders tend to share
the features of disorganization, social intrusiveness, emotional dysregulation, and cognitive
dysregulation. However, ADHD is not characterized by fear of abandonment, self-injury,
extreme ambivalence, or other features of personality disorder. It may take extended clinical
observation, informant interview, or detailed history to distinguish impulsive, socially intrusive,
or inappropriate behavior from narcissistic, aggressive, or domineering behavior to make this
differential diagnosis.
ADHD is not diagnosed if the symptoms of inattention and hyperactivity
occur exclusively during the course of a psychotic disorder.
Symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity, or impulsivity
attributable to the use of medication (e.g., bronchodilators, isoniazid, neuroleptics [resulting in
akathisia], thyroid replacement medication) are diagnosed as other specified or unspecified other
(or unknown) substance–related disorders.
While impairment in complex attention may be one of the affected
cognitive domains in a neurocognitive disorder, it must represent a decline from a previous level
of performance in order to justify a diagnosis of major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
Moreover, major or mild neurocognitive disorder typically has its onset in adulthood. In contrast,
the inattention in ADHD must have been present prior to age 12 and does not represent a decline
from previous functioning.
Comorbidity
Although ADHD is more common in males, females with ADHD have higher rates of a number
of comorbid disorders, particularly oppositional defiant disorder, autism spectrum disorder, and
personality and substance use disorders. Oppositional defiant disorder co-occurs with ADHD in
approximately half of children with the combined presentation and about a quarter with the
predominantly inattentive presentation. Conduct disorder co-occurs in about a quarter of children
