or adolescents with the combined presentation, depending on age and setting. Most children and
adolescents with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder have symptoms that also meet criteria
for ADHD; a lesser percentage of children with ADHD have symptoms that meet criteria for
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Anxiety disorders, major depressive disorder, obsessive-
compulsive disorder, and intermittent explosive disorder occur in a minority of individuals with
ADHD but more often than in the general population. Although substance use disorders are
relatively more frequent among adults with ADHD in the general population, the disorders are
present in only a minority of adults with ADHD. In adults, antisocial and other personality
disorders may co-occur with ADHD.
ADHD may co-occur in variable symptom profiles with other neurodevelopmental disorders,
including specific learning disorder, autism spectrum disorder, intellectual developmental
disorder, language disorders, developmental coordination disorder, and tic disorders.
Comorbid sleep disorders in ADHD are associated with daytime impairments in cognition
(e.g., inattention). Many individuals with ADHD report daytime sleepiness that may meet criteria
for hypersomnolence disorder. One quarter to one-half of individuals with ADHD report sleep
difficulties; studies have shown an association of ADHD with insomnia, circadian rhythm sleep-
wake disorder, sleep-disordered breathing, and restless legs syndrome.
Individuals with ADHD have been found to have elevated rates of a number of medical
conditions, particularly allergy and autoimmune disorders, as well as epilepsy.
76
Other Specified Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
F90.8
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not
meet the full criteria for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or any of the disorders
in the neurodevelopmental disorders diagnostic class. The other specified attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician
chooses to communicate the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the
criteria for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or any specific neurodevelopmental
disorder. This is done by recording “other specified attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder” followed by the specific reason (e.g., “with insufficient inattention
symptoms”).
Unspecified Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
F90.9
