This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not
meet the full criteria for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or any of the disorders
in the neurodevelopmental disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician
chooses not to specify the reason that the criteria are not met for attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder or for a specific neurodevelopmental disorder, and
includes presentations in which there is insufficient information to make a more
specific diagnosis.
Specific Learning Disorder
Specific Learning Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Difficulties learning and using academic skills, as indicated by the presence of at
least one of the following symptoms that have persisted for at least 6 months,
despite the provision of interventions that target those difficulties:
1. Inaccurate or slow and effortful word reading (e.g., reads single words aloud
incorrectly or slowly and hesitantly, frequently guesses words, has difficulty
sounding out words).
2. Difficulty understanding the meaning of what is read (e.g., may read text
accurately but not understand the sequence, relationships, inferences, or
deeper meanings of what is read).
3. Difficulties with spelling (e.g., may add, omit, or substitute vowels or
consonants).
77
4. Difficulties with written expression (e.g., makes multiple grammatical or
punctuation errors within sentences; employs poor paragraph organization;
written expression of ideas lacks clarity).
5. Difficulties mastering number sense, number facts, or calculation (e.g., has
poor understanding of numbers, their magnitude, and relationships; counts on
fingers to add single-digit numbers instead of recalling the math fact as peers
do; gets lost in the midst of arithmetic computation and may switch
procedures).
