6. Difficulties with mathematical reasoning (e.g., has severe difficulty applying
mathematical concepts, facts, or procedures to solve quantitative problems).
B. The affected academic skills are substantially and quantifiably below those
expected for the individual’s chronological age, and cause significant
interference with academic or occupational performance, or with activities of
daily living, as confirmed by individually administered standardized achievement
measures and comprehensive clinical assessment. For individuals age 17 years
and older, a documented history of impairing learning difficulties may be
substituted for the standardized assessment.
C. The learning difficulties begin during school-age years but may not become fully
manifest until the demands for those affected academic skills exceed the
individual’s limited capacities (e.g., as in timed tests, reading or writing lengthy
complex reports for a tight deadline, excessively heavy academic loads).
D. The learning difficulties are not better accounted for by intellectual disabilities,
uncorrected visual or auditory acuity, other mental or neurological disorders,
psychosocial adversity, lack of proficiency in the language of academic
instruction, or inadequate educational instruction.
Note: The four diagnostic criteria are to be met based on a clinical synthesis of the
individual’s history (developmental, medical, family, educational), school reports, and
psychoeducational assessment.
Coding note: Specify all academic domains and subskills that are impaired. When
more than one domain is impaired, each one should be coded individually according
to the following specifiers.
Specify if:
F81.0 With impairment in reading:
Word reading accuracy
Reading rate or fluency
Reading comprehension
78
Note: Dyslexia is an alternative term used to refer to a pattern of learning
difficulties characterized by problems with accurate or fluent word recognition,
poor decoding, and poor spelling abilities. If dyslexia is used to specify this
particular pattern of difficulties, it is important also to specify any additional
difficulties that are present, such as difficulties with reading comprehension or
math reasoning.
F81.81 With impairment in written expression:
Spelling accuracy
Grammar and punctuation accuracy
Clarity or organization of written expression
