F81.2 With impairment in mathematics:
Number sense
Memorization of arithmetic facts
Accurate or fluent calculation
Accurate math reasoning
Note: Dyscalculia is an alternative term used to refer to a pattern of difficulties
characterized by problems processing numerical information, learning
arithmetic facts, and performing accurate or fluent calculations. If dyscalculia is
used to specify this particular pattern of mathematic difficulties, it is important
also to specify any additional difficulties that are present, such as difficulties
with math reasoning or word reasoning accuracy.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Some difficulties learning skills in one or two academic domains, but of
mild enough severity that the individual may be able to compensate or function
well when provided with appropriate accommodations or support services,
especially during the school years.
Moderate: Marked difficulties learning skills in one or more academic domains,
so that the individual is unlikely to become proficient without some intervals of
intensive 
and 
specialized 
teaching 
during 
the 
school 
years. 
Some
accommodations or supportive services at least part of the day at school, in the
workplace, or at home may be needed to complete activities accurately and
efficiently.
Severe: Severe difficulties learning skills, affecting several academic domains,
so that the individual is unlikely to learn those skills without ongoing intensive
individualized and specialized teaching for most of the school years. Even with
an array of appropriate accommodations or services at home, at school, or in the
workplace, the individual may not be able to complete all activities efficiently.
Recording Procedures
Each impaired academic domain and subskill of specific learning disorder should be recorded.
Because of ICD coding requirements, impairments in reading, impairments in written expression,
and impairments in mathematics, with their corresponding impairments in subskills, must be
coded and recorded separately. For example, impairments in reading and mathematics and
impairments in the subskills of reading rate or fluency, reading comprehension, accurate or
fluent calculation, and accurate math reasoning would be coded and recorded as F81.0 specific
learning disorder with impairment in reading, with impairment in reading rate or fluency, and
impairment in reading comprehension; F81.2 specific learning disorder with impairment in
mathematics, with impairment in accurate or fluent calculation and impairment in accurate math
reasoning.
Diagnostic Features
