Specific learning disorder is a neurodevelopmental disorder with a biological origin that is the
basis for abnormalities at a cognitive level that are associated with the behavioral signs of the
disorder. The biological origin includes an interaction of genetic, epigenetic, and environmental
factors, which affect the brain’s ability to perceive or process verbal or nonverbal information
efficiently and accurately.
One essential feature of specific learning disorder is persistent difficulties learning keystone
academic skills (Criterion A), with onset during the years of formal schooling (i.e., the
developmental period). Key academic skills include reading of single words accurately and
fluently, reading comprehension, written expression and spelling, arithmetic calculation, and
mathematical reasoning (solving mathematical problems). In contrast to talking or walking,
which are acquired developmental milestones that emerge with brain maturation, academic skills
(e.g., reading, spelling, writing, mathematics) have to be taught and learned explicitly. Specific
learning disorder disrupts the normal pattern of learning academic skills; it is not simply a
consequence of lack of opportunity of learning or inadequate instruction. Difficulties mastering
these key academic skills may also impede learning in other academic subjects (e.g., history,
science, social studies), but those problems are attributable to difficulties learning the underlying
academic skills.
79
Difficulties learning to map letters with the sounds of one’s language—to read printed words
(often called dyslexia [specific learning disorder with impairment in reading])—is one of the
most common manifestations of specific learning disorder. The learning difficulties manifest as a
range of observable, descriptive behaviors or symptoms (as listed in Criteria A1–A6). These
clinical symptoms may be observed, probed by means of the clinical interview, or ascertained
from school reports, rating scales, or descriptions in previous educational or psychological
assessments. The learning difficulties are persistent, not transitory. In children and adolescents,
persistence is defined as restricted progress in learning (i.e., no evidence that the individual is
catching up with classmates) for at least 6 months despite the provision of extra help at home or
school. For example, difficulties learning to read single words that do not fully or rapidly remit
with the provision of instruction in phonological skills or word identification strategies may
indicate a specific learning disorder. Evidence of persistent learning difficulties may be derived
from cumulative school reports, portfolios of the child’s evaluated work, curriculum-based
measures, or clinical interview. In adults, persistent difficulty refers to ongoing difficulties in
literacy or numeracy skills that manifest during childhood or adolescence, as indicated by
cumulative evidence from school reports, evaluated portfolios of work, or previous assessments.
A second key feature is that the individual’s performance of the affected academic skills is
well below expected for age (Criterion B). One robust clinical indicator of difficulties learning
academic skills is low academic achievement for age or average achievement that is sustainable
only by extraordinarily high levels of effort or support. In children, the low academic skills cause
significant interference in school performance (as indicated by school reports and teacher’s
grades or ratings). Another clinical indicator, particularly in adults, is avoidance of activities that
require the academic skills. Also in adulthood, low academic skills interfere with occupational
performance or everyday activities requiring those skills (as indicated by self-report or report by
others). However, this criterion also requires psychometric evidence from an individually
