administered, psychometrically sound and culturally appropriate test of academic achievement
that is norm-referenced or criterion-referenced. Academic skills are distributed along a
continuum, so there is no natural cutpoint that can be used to differentiate individuals with and
without specific learning disorder. Thus, any threshold used to specify what constitutes
significantly low academic achievement (e.g., academic skills well below age expectation) is to a
large extent arbitrary. Low achievement scores on one or more standardized tests or subtests
within an academic domain (i.e., at least 1.5 standard deviations [SD] below the population mean
for age, which translates to a standard score of 78 or less, which is below the 7th percentile) are
needed for the greatest diagnostic certainty. However, precise scores will vary according to the
particular standardized tests that are used. On the basis of clinical judgment, a more lenient
threshold may be used (e.g., 1.0 SD below the population mean for age), when learning
difficulties are supported by converging evidence from clinical assessment, academic history,
school reports, or test scores. Moreover, since standardized tests are not available in all
languages, the diagnosis may then be based in part on clinical judgment of scores on available
test measures.
A third core feature is that the learning difficulties are readily apparent in the early school
years in most individuals (Criterion C). However, in others, the learning difficulties may not
manifest fully until later school years, by which time learning demands have increased and
exceed the individual’s limited capacities.
Another key diagnostic feature is that the learning difficulties are considered “specific” for
four reasons. First, they are not better explained by intellectual developmental disorders
(intellectual developmental disorder [intellectual disability]; global developmental delay);
hearing or vision disorders; or neurological or motor disorders (Criterion D). Specific learning
disorder affects learning in individuals who otherwise demonstrate normal levels of intellectual
functioning (generally estimated by an IQ score of greater than about 70 [± 5 points allowing for
measurement error]). The phrase “unexpected academic
80
underachievement” is often cited as the defining characteristic of specific learning disorder in
that the specific learning disabilities are not part of a more general learning difficulty as
manifested in intellectual developmental disorder or global developmental delay.
Second, the learning difficulty cannot be attributed to more general external factors, such as
economic or environmental disadvantage, chronic absenteeism, or lack of education as typically
provided in the individual’s community context. Third, the learning difficulty cannot be
attributed to neurological (e.g., pediatric stroke) or motor disorders or to vision or hearing
disorders, which are often associated with problems learning academic skills but are
distinguishable by presence of neurological signs. Finally, the learning difficulty may be
restricted to one academic skill or domain (e.g., reading single words, retrieving or calculating
number facts).
Specific learning disorder may also occur in individuals identified as intellectually “gifted.”
These individuals may be able to sustain apparently adequate academic functioning by using
compensatory strategies, extraordinarily high effort, or support, until the learning demands or
assessment procedures (e.g., timed tests) pose barriers to their demonstrating their learning or
accomplishing required tasks. In these cases, the individual’s achievement scores will be low
