relative to ability level or achievement in other domains, rather than to the population mean for
achievement.
Comprehensive assessment is required. Specific learning disorder can only be diagnosed
after formal education starts but can be diagnosed at any point afterward in children, adolescents,
or adults, providing there is evidence of onset during the years of formal schooling (i.e., the
developmental period). No single data source is sufficient for a diagnosis of specific learning
disorder. Rather, specific learning disorder is a clinical diagnosis based on a synthesis of the
individual’s medical, developmental, educational, and family history; the history of the learning
difficulty, including its previous and current manifestation; the impact of the difficulty on
academic, occupational, or social functioning; previous or current school reports; portfolios of
work requiring academic skills; curriculum-based assessments; and previous or current scores
from individual standardized tests of academic achievement. If an intellectual, sensory,
neurological, or motor disorder is suspected, then the clinical assessment for specific learning
disorder should also include methods appropriate for these disorders. Thus, comprehensive
assessment will involve professionals with expertise in specific learning disorder and
psychological/cognitive assessment. Since specific learning disorder typically persists into
adulthood, reassessment is rarely necessary, unless indicated by marked changes in the learning
difficulties (amelioration or worsening) or requested for specific purposes.
Associated Features
The symptoms of specific learning disorder (difficulty with aspects of reading, writing, or
mathematics) frequently co-occur. An uneven profile of abilities is common, such as a
combination of above-average abilities in drawing, design, and other visuospatial abilities, and
slow, effortful, and inaccurate reading and poor reading comprehension and written expression.
Specific learning disorder is frequently but not invariably preceded, in preschool years, by delays
in attention, language, or motor skills that may persist and co-occur with specific learning
disorder.
Individuals with specific learning disorder typically (but not invariably) exhibit poor
performance on psychological tests of cognitive processing. However, it remains unclear
whether these cognitive abnormalities are the cause, correlate, or consequence of the learning
difficulties. Cognitive deficits associated with difficulties learning to read words are well
documented, and there is a burgeoning understanding of the cognitive deficits associated with
difficulty acquiring mathematics skills, but cognitive deficits associated with other
manifestations of specific learning disorder (e.g., reading comprehension, written expression) are
underspecified.
81
Although individual cognitive deficits particularly contribute to each specific learning
disorder symptom, some cognitive deficits are shared across different specific learning disorder
subtypes (e.g., processing speed) and may contribute to co-occurring symptoms of specific
learning disorder. The co-occurring nature of the symptoms of specific learning disorder and the
shared cognitive deficits across the specific learning disorder subtypes suggest shared underlying
biological mechanisms.
Thus, individuals with similar behavioral symptoms or test scores are found to have a variety
