of cognitive deficits, and many of these processing deficits are also found in other
neurodevelopmental disorders (e.g., attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder [ADHD], autistic
spectrum disorder, communication disorders, developmental coordination disorder).
As a group, individuals with the disorder show circumscribed alterations in cognitive
processing and brain structure and function. Genetic differences are also evident at the group
level. However, cognitive testing, neuroimaging, or genetic testing are not useful for diagnosis at
this time, and assessment of cognitive processing deficits is not required for diagnostic
assessment.
Prevalence
The prevalence of specific learning disorder across the academic domains of reading, writing,
and mathematics is 5%–15% among school-age children in Brazil, Northern Ireland, and the
United States. Prevalence in adults is unknown.
Development and Course
Onset, recognition, and diagnosis of specific learning disorder usually occur during the
elementary school years when children are required to learn to read, spell, write, and learn
mathematics. However, precursors such as language delays or deficits, difficulties in rhyming or
counting, or difficulties with fine motor skills required for writing commonly occur in early
childhood before the start of formal schooling.
Manifestations may be behavioral (e.g., a reluctance to engage in learning; oppositional
behavior). Specific learning disorder is lifelong, but the course and clinical expression are
variable, in part depending on the interactions among the task demands of the environment, the
range and severity of the individual’s learning difficulties, the individual’s learning abilities,
comorbidity, and the available support systems and intervention. Nonetheless, problems with
reading fluency and comprehension, spelling, written expression, and numeracy skills in
everyday life typically persist into adulthood.
Changes in manifestation of symptoms occur with age, so that an individual may have a
persistent or shifting array of learning difficulties across the lifespan. Adults with specific
learning disorder appear to experience limitations and restrictions in activity and participation in
domains of communication, interpersonal interactions and community, and social and civic life.
Examples of symptoms that may be observed among preschool-age children include a lack of
interest in playing games with language sounds (e.g., repetition, rhyming), and they may have
trouble learning nursery rhymes. Preschool children with specific learning disorder may
frequently use baby talk, mispronounce words, and have trouble remembering names of letters,
numbers, or days of the week. They may fail to recognize letters in their own names and have
trouble learning to count. Kindergarten-age children with specific learning disorder may be
unable to recognize and write letters, may be unable to write their own names, or may have
persistent use of invented spelling beyond developmentally typical time frames.
They may have trouble breaking down spoken words into syllables (e.g., “cowboy” into
“cow” and “boy”) and trouble recognizing words that rhyme (e.g., cat, bat, hat). Kindergarten-
age children also may have trouble connecting letters with their sounds (e.g., letter b makes the
sound /b/) and may be unable to recognize phonemes (e.g., do not know which in a set of words
[e.g., dog, man, car] starts with the same sound as “cat”).
