Specific learning disorder in elementary school–age children typically manifests as marked
difficulty learning letter-sound correspondence (particularly in English-speaking children),
82
fluent word decoding, spelling, or math facts; reading aloud is slow, inaccurate, and effortful,
and some children struggle to understand the magnitude that a spoken or written number
represents. Children in primary grades (grades 1–3) may continue to have problems recognizing
and manipulating phonemes, be unable to read common one-syllable words (such as mat or top),
and be unable recognize common irregularly spelled words (e.g., said, two). They may commit
reading errors that indicate problems in connecting sounds and letters (e.g., “big” for “got”) and
have difficulty sequencing numbers and letters. Children in grades 1–3 also may have difficulty
remembering number facts or arithmetic procedures for adding, subtracting, and so forth, and
may complain that reading or arithmetic is hard and avoid doing it. Children with specific
learning disorder in the middle grades (grades 4–6) may mispronounce or skip parts of long,
multisyllable words (e.g., say “conible” for “convertible,” “aminal” for “animal”) and confuse
words that sound alike (e.g., “tornado” for “volcano”). They may have trouble remembering
dates, names, and telephone numbers and may have trouble completing homework or tests on
time. Children in the middle grades also may have poor comprehension with or without slow,
effortful, and inaccurate reading, and they may have trouble reading small function words (e.g.,
that, the, an, in). They may have very poor spelling and poor written work. They may get the first
part of a word correctly, then guess wildly (e.g., read “clover” as “clock”), and may express fear
of reading aloud or refuse to read aloud.
By contrast, adolescents may have mastered word decoding, but reading remains slow and
effortful, and they are likely to show marked problems in reading comprehension and written
expression (including poor spelling) and poor mastery of math facts or mathematical problem
solving. During adolescence and into adulthood, individuals with specific learning disorder may
continue to make numerous spelling mistakes and read single words and connected text slowly
and with much effort, with trouble pronouncing multisyllable words. They may frequently need
to reread material to understand or get the main point and have trouble making inferences from
written text. Adolescents and adults may avoid activities that demand reading or arithmetic
(reading for pleasure, reading instructions). Adults with specific learning disorder have ongoing
spelling problems, slow and effortful reading, or problems making important inferences from
numerical information in work-related written documents. They may avoid both leisure and
work-related activities that demand reading or writing or use alternative approaches to access
print (e.g., text-to-speech/speech-to-text software, audiobooks, audiovisual media).
An alternative clinical expression is that of circumscribed learning difficulties that persist
across the lifespan, such as an inability to master the basic sense of number (e.g., to know which
of a pair of numbers or dots represents the larger magnitude), or lack of proficiency in word
identification or spelling. Avoidance of or reluctance to engage in activities requiring academic
skills is common in children, adolescents, and adults. Individuals with poor reading and math
skills are more likely to report socioemotional distress (e.g., sadness, loneliness) as they advance
across elementary grade levels.
Episodes of severe anxiety or anxiety disorders, including somatic complaints or panic
attacks, are common across the lifespan and accompany both the circumscribed and the broader
