Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Course modifiers.
expression of learning difficulties.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental 
factors, 
including 
socioeconomic 
conditions 
(e.g., 
low
socioeconomic status) and exposure to neurotoxicants, increase the risk for specific learning
disorder or difficulties in reading and mathematics. Risks for specific learning disorder or
difficulties in reading and mathematics include prenatal or early-life exposure to any of the
following: air pollution, nicotine, polybrominated diphenyl ethers or polychlorinated biphenyls
(flame retardants), lead, or manganese.
Specific learning disorder appears to aggregate in families, particularly
when affecting reading, mathematics, and spelling. The relative risk of specific
83
learning disorder in reading or mathematics is substantially higher (e.g., 4–8 times and 5–10
times higher, respectively) in first-degree relatives of individuals with these learning difficulties
compared with those without them. Notably, rates vary depending on method of ascertainment
(objective testing or self-report) of parent diagnostic status. Family history of reading difficulties
(dyslexia) and parental literacy skills predict literacy problems or specific learning disorder in
offspring, indicating the combined role of genetic and environmental factors.
There is high heritability for both reading ability and reading disability in alphabetic and
nonalphabetic languages, including high heritability for most manifestations of learning abilities
and disabilities (e.g., heritability estimate values greater than 0.6). Covariation between various
manifestations of learning difficulties is high, suggesting that genes related to one presentation
are highly correlated with genes related to another manifestation.
Preterm delivery or very low birthweight is a risk for specific learning disorder. In
individuals with neurofibromatosis type 1, risk of specific learning disorder is high, with up to
75% of individuals demonstrating a learning disorder.
Marked problems with inattentive, internalizing, and externalizing behaviors in
preschool years are predictive of later difficulties in reading and mathematics (but not necessarily
specific learning disorder) and nonresponse to effective academic interventions. Language
impairment in preschool years is strongly associated with later impairment in reading (e.g., word
reading, reading comprehension). For example, delay or disorders in speech or language, or
impaired cognitive processing (e.g., phonological awareness, working memory, rapid serial
naming), may predict later specific learning disorder in reading and in written expression.
Additionally, a diagnosis of ADHD in childhood is associated with underachievement in reading
and math in adulthood. Comorbidity with ADHD is predictive of worse mental health outcome
than that associated with specific learning disorder without ADHD. Systematic, intensive,
individualized instruction, using evidence-based interventions, may improve or ameliorate the
learning difficulties in some individuals or promote the use of compensatory strategies in others,
thereby mitigating the otherwise poor outcomes.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Specific learning disorder occurs across linguistic and ethnoracial backgrounds and across
