cultural and socioeconomic contexts but may vary in its manifestation according to the nature of
the spoken and written symbol systems and cultural and educational practices. For example, the
cognitive processing requirements of reading and of working with numbers vary greatly across
orthographies. In the English language, the observable hallmark clinical symptom of difficulties
learning to read is inaccurate and slow reading of single words; in other alphabetic languages
that have more direct mapping between sounds and letters (e.g., Spanish, German) and in
nonalphabetic languages (e.g., Chinese, Japanese), the hallmark feature is slow but accurate
reading. In English-language learners, assessment should include consideration of whether the
source of reading difficulties is a limited proficiency with English or a specific learning disorder.
Risk factors for specific learning disorder in English-language learners include a family history
of specific learning disorder or language delay in the native language, as well as learning
difficulties and deficits in phonological memory in English and failure to catch up with peers. If
there is suspicion of cultural or language differences (e.g., that an English-language learner is
influenced by limited English proficiency), the assessment needs to take into account the
individual’s language proficiency in his or her first or native language as well as in the second
language (in this example, English). Importantly, children who speak a language at home that
differs phonologically from the language of academic instruction are not more likely to have
phonological deficits than their peers who speak the same language at home and at school.
Comorbid reading difficulties may vary with different languages; for example, reading
difficulties are less frequent among Chinese-reading children with developmental coordination
disorder in Taiwan compared
84
with children in English-speaking countries, possibly because of the characteristics of the two
written languages (logographic vs. alphabetic). Considerations in assessment may include the
linguistic and cultural context in which the individual is living, as well as his or her educational
and learning history in the original linguistic and cultural context. Risk factors for learning
problems among refugee and migrant children include teacher stereotyping and low expectations,
bullying, ethnic and racialized discrimination, parental misunderstandings about educational
styles and expectations, trauma, and postmigration stressors.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Specific learning disorder is more common in males than in females (ratios range from about 2:1
to 3:1) and cannot be attributed to factors such as ascertainment bias, definitional or
measurement variation, language, ethnoracial background, or socioeconomic status. Sex
differences in dyslexia (specific learning disorder with impairment in reading) may be partially
mediated by processing speed.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
In U.S. adolescents age 15 years in public school, poor reading ability was associated with
suicidal thoughts and behavior compared with adolescents with typical reading scores, even
when controlling for sociodemographic and psychiatric variables. In a population-based study of
adults in Canada, prevalence of lifetime suicide attempts among those with specific learning
disorder was higher than that among those without a specific learning disorder, even after
