Normal variations in academic attainment.
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability).
Learning difficulties due to neurological or sensory disorders.
Neurocognitive disorders.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
adjustment for childhood adversities, history of mental illness and substance use, and
sociodemographic factors. Among those with specific learning disorder, a history of witnessing
chronic parental domestic violence and ever having had a major depressive disorder were
associated with increased risk for suicidal behavior.
Functional Consequences of Specific Learning Disorder
Specific learning disorder can have negative functional consequences across the lifespan,
including lower academic attainment, higher rates of high school dropout, lower rates of
postsecondary education, high levels of psychological distress and poorer overall mental health,
higher rates of unemployment and underemployment, and lower incomes. School dropout and
co-occurring depressive symptoms increase the risk for poor mental health outcomes, including
suicidal thoughts or behavior, whereas high levels of social or emotional support predict better
mental health outcomes.
Differential Diagnosis
Specific learning disorder is distinguished from normal
variations in academic attainment attributable to external factors (e.g., lack of educational
opportunity, consistently poor instruction, learning in a second language), because the learning
difficulties persist in the presence of adequate educational opportunity and exposure to the same
instruction as the peer group, and competency in the language of instruction, even when it is
different from one’s primary spoken language.
Specific learning disorder differs from
general learning difficulties associated with intellectual developmental disorder, because the
learning difficulties occur in the presence of normal levels of intellectual functioning (i.e., IQ
score of at least 70 ± 5). If intellectual developmental disorder is present, specific learning
disorder can be diagnosed only when the learning difficulties are in excess of those usually
associated with the intellectual developmental disorder.
Specific 
learning 
disorder 
is
distinguished from learning difficulties due to neurological or sensory disorders
85
(e.g., pediatric stroke, traumatic brain injury, hearing impairment, vision impairment), because in
these cases there are abnormal findings on neurological examination.
Specific learning disorder is distinguished from learning problems
associated with neurodegenerative cognitive disorders. In specific learning disorder, the clinical
expression of specific learning difficulties occurs during the developmental period, which
sometimes only becomes evident when learning demands have increased and exceed the
individual’s limited capacities (as may occur in adulthood), and the difficulties do not manifest
as a marked decline from a former state.
Specific learning disorder is distinguished from the poor
academic performance associated with ADHD, because in the latter condition the problems may
not necessarily reflect specific difficulties in learning academic skills but rather may reflect
difficulties in performing those skills. However, the co-occurrence of specific learning disorder
