Psychotic disorders.
F82
and ADHD is more frequent than expected by chance. If criteria for both disorders are met, both
diagnoses can be given.
Specific learning disorder is distinguished from the cognitive-processing
difficulties associated with schizophrenia or other psychotic disorders, because with these
disorders there is a decline (often rapid) in these functional domains. However, deficits in
reading ability are more severe in specific learning disorder than what would be predicted by the
general cognitive impairments associated with schizophrenia. If criteria for both disorders are
met, both diagnoses can be given.
Comorbidity
The different types of specific learning disorder commonly co-occur with one another (e.g.,
specific learning disorder with impairment in mathematics and with impairment in reading) and
with other neurodevelopmental disorders (e.g., ADHD, communication disorders, developmental
coordination disorder, autism spectrum disorder) or other mental disorders (e.g., anxiety and
depressive disorders) or behavioral problems. Notably, estimates of the comorbidity of math and
reading difficulties vary depending on the tests used to define the math difficulty, likely because
the same symptom (e.g., arithmetic problems) can be associated with different cognitive deficits
(e.g., a deficit in language skills or a deficit in number processing). These comorbidities do not
necessarily exclude the diagnosis of specific learning disorder but may make testing and
differential diagnosis more difficult, because each of the co-occurring disorders independently
interferes with the execution of activities of daily living, including learning. Thus, clinical
judgment is required to attribute such impairment to learning difficulties. If there is an indication
that another diagnosis could account for the difficulties learning keystone academic skills
described in Criterion A, specific learning disorder should not be diagnosed.
Motor Disorders
Developmental Coordination Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. The acquisition and execution of coordinated motor skills is substantially below
that expected given the individual’s chronological age and opportunity for skill
learning and use. Difficulties are manifested as clumsiness (e.g., dropping or
bumping into
86
objects) as well as slowness and inaccuracy of performance of motor skills (e.g.,
catching an object, using scissors or cutlery, handwriting, riding a bike, or
participating in sports).
