B. The motor skills deficit in Criterion A significantly and persistently interferes with
activities of daily living appropriate to chronological age (e.g., self-care and self-
maintenance) and impacts academic/school productivity, prevocational and
vocational activities, leisure, and play.
C. Onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period.
D. The motor skills deficits are not better explained by intellectual developmental
disorder (intellectual disability) or visual impairment and are not attributable to a
neurological condition affecting movement (e.g., cerebral palsy, muscular
dystrophy, degenerative disorder).
Diagnostic Features
The diagnosis of developmental coordination disorder is made by a clinical synthesis of the
history (developmental and medical), physical examination, school or workplace report, and
individual assessment using psychometrically sound and culturally appropriate standardized
tests. The manifestation of impaired skills requiring motor coordination (Criterion A) varies with
age. Young children may be delayed in achieving motor milestones (i.e., sitting, crawling,
walking), although many achieve typical motor milestones. They also may be delayed in
developing skills such as negotiating stairs, pedaling, buttoning shirts, completing puzzles, and
using zippers. Even when the skill is achieved, movement execution may appear awkward, slow,
or less precise than that of peers. Older children and adults may display slow speed or inaccuracy
with motor aspects of activities such as assembling puzzles, building models, playing ball games
(especially in teams), handwriting, typing, driving, or carrying out self-care skills.
Developmental coordination disorder is diagnosed only if the impairment in motor skills
significantly interferes with the performance of, or participation in, daily activities in family,
social, school, or community life (Criterion B). Examples of such activities include getting
dressed, eating meals with age-appropriate utensils and without mess, engaging in physical
games with others, using specific tools in class such as rulers and scissors, and participating in
team exercise activities at school. Not only is ability to perform these actions impaired, but also
marked slowness in execution is common. Handwriting competence is frequently affected,
consequently affecting legibility and/or speed of written output and affecting academic
achievement (the impact is distinguished from specific learning difficulty by the emphasis on the
motoric component of written output skills). In adults, everyday skills in education and work,
especially those in which speed and accuracy are required, are affected by coordination
problems.
Criterion C states that the onset of symptoms of developmental coordination disorder must be
in the early developmental period. However, developmental coordination disorder is typically
not diagnosed before age 5 years because there is considerable variation in the age at acquisition
of many motor skills or a lack of stability of measurement in early childhood (e.g., some children
catch up) or because other causes of motor delay may not have fully manifested.
Criterion D specifies that the diagnosis of developmental coordination disorder is made if the
coordination difficulties are not better explained by visual impairment or attributable to a
neurological condition. Thus, visual function examination and neurological examination must be
included in the diagnostic evaluation. If intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual
