Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
disability) is present, the motor difficulties are in excess of those expected for the mental age;
however, no IQ cutoff or discrepancy criterion is specified.
Developmental coordination disorder does not have discrete subtypes; however, individuals
may be impaired predominantly in gross motor skills or in fine motor skills, including
handwriting skills.
Other terms used to describe developmental coordination disorder include childhood
dyspraxia, specific developmental disorder of motor function, and clumsy child syndrome.
87
Associated Features
Some children with developmental coordination disorder show additional (usually suppressed)
motor activity, such as choreiform movements of unsupported limbs or mirror movements. These
“overflow” movements are referred to as neurodevelopmental immaturities or neurological soft
signs rather than neurological abnormalities. In both current literature and clinical practice, their
role in diagnosis is still unclear, requiring further evaluation.
Prevalence
The prevalence of developmental coordination disorder in children ages 5–11 years ranges from
5% to 8% cross-nationally (in the United Kingdom, 1.8% of children age 7 years are diagnosed
with severe developmental coordination disorder and 3% with probable developmental
coordination disorder); and 7%–8% in Canada, Sweden, and Taiwan. Males are more often
affected than females, with a male:female ratio between 2:1 and 7:1.
Development and Course
The course of developmental coordination disorder is variable but stable at least to 1-year and 2-
year follow-up. Although there may be improvement in the longer term, problems with
coordinated movements continue through adolescence in an estimated 50%–70% of children.
Onset is in early childhood. Delayed motor milestones may be the first signs, or the disorder is
first recognized when the child attempts tasks such as holding a knife and fork, buttoning
clothes, or playing ball games. In middle childhood, there are difficulties with motor aspects of
assembling puzzles, building models, playing ball, and handwriting, as well as with organizing
belongings, when motor sequencing and coordination are required. In early adulthood, there is
continuing difficulty in learning new tasks involving complex/automatic motor skills, including
driving and using tools. Inability to take notes and handwrite quickly may affect performance in
the workplace. Co-occurrence with other disorders (see the section “Comorbidity” for this
disorder) has an additional impact on presentation, course, and outcome.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Developmental coordination disorder is associated with prematurity and low birth
weight and with prenatal exposure to alcohol.
Impairments in underlying neurodevelopmental processes have been
found in visual-motor skills, including both visual-motor perception and spatial mentalizing.
Cerebellar dysfunction, which affects the ability to make rapid motoric adjustments as the
