Course modifiers.
Motor impairments due to another medical condition.
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability).
complexity of the required movements increases, may also be involved. However, the precise
neural basis of developmental coordination disorder remains unclear. Because of the co-
occurrence of developmental coordination disorder with other neurodevelopmental disorders,
including attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), specific learning disabilities, and
autism spectrum disorder, shared genetic effect has been proposed. However, consistent co-
occurrence in twins appears only in severe cases.
Individuals with ADHD and with developmental coordination disorder
demonstrate more impairment than individuals with ADHD without developmental coordination
disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Developmental coordination disorder occurs across cultural, ethnoracial, and socioeconomic
contexts. At the same time, cultural variations in motor development (both accelerated and
delayed relative to U.S. norms) have been reported. These appear to be associated with
caregiving practices related to expectations of independent mobility during development,
inadequate opportunities for mobility among children in severe poverty, and differences in
measurement methodology. By definition, “activities of daily living” implies cultural differences
88
necessitating consideration of the context in which the individual child is living as well as
whether the child has had appropriate opportunities to learn and practice such activities. Higher
prevalence of developmental coordination disorder in studies of children from some low- and
middle-income countries may reflect the impact of socioeconomic disadvantage on motor
development.
Functional Consequences of Developmental Coordination Disorder
Developmental coordination disorder leads to impaired functional performance in activities of
daily living (Criterion B), and the impairment is increased with co-occurring conditions.
Consequences of developmental coordination disorder include reduced participation in team play
and sports; poor self-esteem and sense of self-worth; emotional or behavioral problems; impaired
academic achievement; poor physical fitness; reduced physical activity and obesity; and poor
health-related quality of life.
Differential Diagnosis
Problems in coordination may be associated
with visual function impairment and specific neurological disorders (e.g., cerebral palsy,
progressive lesions of the cerebellum, neuromuscular disorders). In such cases, there are
additional findings on neurological examination.
If intellectual developmental disorder is
present, motor competences may be impaired in accordance with the intellectual disability.
However, if the motor difficulties are in excess of what could be accounted for by the intellectual
developmental disorder, and criteria for developmental coordination disorder are met,
developmental coordination disorder can be diagnosed as well.
