Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Autism spectrum disorder.
Joint hypermobility syndrome.
F98.4
Individuals with ADHD may fall, bump into objects, or
knock things over. Careful observation across different contexts is required to ascertain if lack of
motor competence is attributable to distractibility and impulsiveness rather than to
developmental coordination disorder. If criteria for both ADHD and developmental coordination
disorder are met, both diagnoses can be given.
Individuals with autism spectrum disorder may be uninterested in
participating in tasks requiring complex coordination skills, such as ball sports, which will affect
test performance and function but not reflect core motor competence. Co-occurrence of
developmental coordination disorder and autism spectrum disorder is common. If criteria for
both disorders are met, both diagnoses can be given.
Individuals with syndromes causing hyperextensible joints (found
on physical examination; often with a complaint of pain) may present with symptoms similar to
those of developmental coordination disorder.
Comorbidity
Disorders that commonly co-occur with developmental coordination disorder include
communication disorders; specific learning disorder (especially reading and writing); problems
of inattention, including ADHD (the most frequent coexisting condition, with about 50% co-
occurrence); autism spectrum disorder; disruptive and emotional behavior problems; and joint
hypermobility syndrome. Different clusters of co-occurrence may be present (e.g., a cluster with
severe reading disorders, fine motor problems, and handwriting problems; another cluster with
impaired movement control and motor planning). Presence of other disorders does not exclude
developmental coordination disorder but may make testing more difficult and may independently
interfere with the execution of activities of daily living, thus requiring examiner judgment in
ascribing impairment to motor skills.
89
Stereotypic Movement Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Repetitive, seemingly driven, and apparently purposeless motor behavior (e.g.,
hand shaking or waving, body rocking, head banging, self-biting, hitting own
body).
B. The repetitive motor behavior interferes with social, academic, or other activities
and may result in self-injury.
C. Onset is in the early developmental period.
D. The repetitive motor behavior is not attributable to the physiological effects of a
substance or neurological condition and is not better explained by another
neurodevelopmental or mental disorder (e.g., trichotillomania [hair-pulling
disorder], obsessive-compulsive disorder).
