Specify if:
With self-injurious behavior (or behavior that would result in an injury if
preventive measures were not used)
Without self-injurious behavior
Specify if:
Associated 
with 
a 
known 
genetic 
or 
other 
medical 
condition,
neurodevelopmental disorder, or environmental factor (e.g., Lesch-Nyhan
syndrome, intellectual developmental disorder [intellectual disability], intrauterine
alcohol exposure)
Coding note: Use additional code to identify the associated genetic or other
medical condition, neurodevelopmental disorder, or environmental factor.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Symptoms are easily suppressed by sensory stimulus or distraction.
Moderate: Symptoms require explicit protective measures and behavioral
modification.
Severe: Continuous monitoring and protective measures are required to prevent
serious injury.
Recording Procedures
For stereotypic movement disorder that is associated with a known genetic or other medical
condition, neurodevelopmental disorder, or environmental factor, record stereotypic movement
disorder associated with (name of condition, disorder, or factor) (e.g., stereotypic movement
disorder associated with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome).
Specifiers
The severity of non-self-injurious stereotypic movements ranges from mild presentations that are
easily suppressed by a sensory stimulus or distraction to continuous movements that markedly
interfere with all activities of daily living. Self-injurious behaviors range in severity along
various dimensions, including the frequency, impact on adaptive functioning, and severity of
bodily injury (from mild bruising or erythema from hitting hand against body, to lacerations or
amputation of digits, to retinal detachment from head banging).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of stereotypic movement disorder is repetitive, seemingly driven, and
apparently purposeless motor behavior (Criterion A). These behaviors are often rhythmical
movements of the head, hands, or body without obvious adaptive function. The movements may
or may not respond to efforts to stop them. Among typically developing children, the repetitive
movements can usually be stopped when attention is directed to them
90
or when the child is distracted from performing them. Among children with neurodevelopmental
