disorders, the behaviors are typically less responsive to such efforts. In other cases, the
individual demonstrates self-restraining behaviors (e.g., sitting on hands, wrapping arms in
clothing, finding a protective device).
The repertoire of behaviors is variable; each individual presents with his or her own
individually patterned, “signature” behavior. Examples of non-self-injurious stereotypic
movements include, but are not limited to, body rocking, bilateral flapping or rotating hand
movements, flicking or fluttering fingers in front of the face, arm waving or flapping, and head
nodding; mouth stretching is commonly seen in association with upper limb movements.
Stereotyped self-injurious behaviors include, but are not limited to, repetitive head banging, face
slapping, eye poking, and biting of hands, lips, or other body parts. Eye poking is particularly
concerning; it occurs more frequently among children with visual impairment. Multiple
movements may be combined (e.g., cocking the head, rocking the torso, waving a small string
repetitively in front of the face).
Stereotypic movements may occur many times during a day, lasting a few seconds to several
minutes or longer. Frequency can vary from many occurrences in a single day to several weeks
elapsing between episodes. The behaviors vary in context, occurring when the individual is
engrossed in other activities, when excited, stressed, fatigued, or bored. Criterion A requires that
the movements be “apparently” purposeless. However, some functions may be served by the
movements. For example, stereotypic movements might reduce anxiety in response to external
stressors.
Criterion B requires that the stereotypic movements interfere with social, academic, or other
activities and, in some children, may result in self-injury (or would if protective measures were
not used). The presence or absence of self-injurious behavior should be indicated using the
specifiers “with self-injurious behavior” or “without self-injurious behavior.” Onset of
stereotypic movements is in the early developmental period (Criterion C). Criterion D requires
that the repetitive, stereotyped behavior in stereotypic movement disorder is not attributable to
the physiological effects of a substance or neurological condition and is not better explained by
another neurodevelopmental or mental disorder. The presence of stereotypic movements may
indicate an undetected neurodevelopmental problem, especially in children ages 1–3 years.
Prevalence
Simple stereotypic movements (e.g., rocking) are common in young typically developing
children (e.g., 5%–19% in the United Kingdom and United States). Complex stereotypic
movements are much less common (occurring in approximately 3%–4%). Between 4% and 16%
of individuals with intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability) in samples from
high-income countries engage in stereotypy and self-injury. The risk is greater in individuals
with severe intellectual developmental disorder. Among individuals with intellectual
developmental disorder living in residential facilities, 10%–15% may have stereotypic
movement disorder with self-injury. Repetitive and restricted behaviors and interests may be risk
markers for the onset of self-injury, aggression, and destruction in children with severe
intellectual developmental disorder.
Development and Course
Stereotypic movements typically begin within the first 3 years of life. Simple stereotypic
