Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Normal development.
movements are common in infancy and may be involved in acquisition of motor mastery. In
children who develop complex motor stereotypies, approximately 80% exhibit symptoms before
age 24 months, 12% between 24 and 35 months, and 8% at 36 months or older. In most typically
developing children, the severity and frequency of stereotyped movements diminish over time.
Onset of complex motor stereotypies may be in infancy or later in the developmental period.
Among individuals with intellectual developmental
91
disorder, the stereotyped, self-injurious behaviors may persist for years, even though the
typography or pattern of self-injury may change.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Social isolation is a risk factor for self-stimulation that may progress to
stereotypic movements with repetitive self-injury. Environmental stress may also trigger
stereotypic behavior. Fear may alter physiological state, resulting in increased frequency of
stereotypic behaviors.
Stereotypic movement disorder is believed to be somewhat heritable
based on the high frequency of cases that have a positive family history of motor stereotypies.
Significant reduction in the putamen volume in children with stereotypies suggests that distinct
cortical-striatal pathways associated with habitual behaviors (i.e., premotor to posterior putamen
circuits) may be the underlying anatomical site in complex motor stereotypies. Lower cognitive
functioning is linked to greater risk for stereotypic behaviors and poorer response to
interventions. Stereotypic movements are more frequent among individuals with moderate-to-
severe/profound intellectual developmental disorder, who by virtue of a particular syndrome
(e.g., Rett syndrome) or environmental factor (e.g., an environment with relatively insufficient
stimulation) seem to be at higher risk for stereotypies. Repetitive self-injurious behavior may be
a behavioral phenotype in neurogenetic syndromes. For example, in Lesch-Nyhan syndrome,
there are both stereotypic dystonic movements and self-mutilation of fingers, lip biting, and other
forms of self-injury unless the individual is restrained, and in Rett syndrome and Cornelia de
Lange syndrome, self-injury may result from the hand-to-mouth stereotypies. Stereotypic
behaviors may also result from a painful medical condition (e.g., middle ear infection, dental
problems, gastroesophageal reflux).
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Stereotypic repetitive behaviors, with or without self-injury, variedly manifest in many cultures.
Cultural attitudes toward unusual behaviors may result in delayed diagnosis. Overall cultural
tolerance and attitudes toward stereotypic movement vary and must be considered.
Differential Diagnosis
Simple stereotypic movements are common in infancy and early childhood.
Rocking may occur in the transition from sleep to awake, a behavior that usually resolves with
age. Complex stereotypies are less common in typically developing children and can usually be
suppressed by distraction or sensory stimulation. The individual’s daily routine is rarely affected,
