Autism spectrum disorder.
Tic disorders.
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
Other neurological and medical conditions.
and the movements generally do not cause the child distress. The diagnosis would not be
appropriate in these circumstances.
Stereotypic movements may be a presenting symptom of autism
spectrum disorder and should be considered when repetitive movements and behaviors are being
evaluated. Deficits of social communication and reciprocity manifesting in autism spectrum
disorder are generally absent in stereotypic movement disorder, and thus social interaction, social
communication, and rigid repetitive behaviors and interests are distinguishing features. When
autism spectrum disorder is present, stereotypic movement disorder is diagnosed only when there
is self-injury or when the stereotypic behaviors are sufficiently severe to become a focus of
treatment.
Typically, stereotypies have an earlier age at onset (before 3 years) than do tics,
which have a mean age at onset of 4–6 years. They also are consistent and fixed in their pattern
or topography compared with tics, which are variable in their presentation,
92
typically changing in character over time. Stereotypies may involve arms, hands, or the entire
body, while tics commonly involve eyes, face, head, and shoulders. Stereotypies are more fixed,
rhythmic, and prolonged in duration than tics, which, generally, are brief, rapid, random, and
fluctuating. Stereotypies are ego-syntonic (children enjoy them) as opposed to tics, which are
usually ego-dystonic. Tics wax and wane in location and time and are uniquely associated with
premonitory urge (a physical feeling that precedes many tic movements). Tics and stereotypic
movements are both reduced by distraction.
Stereotypic movement disorder is distinguished from
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) by the absence of obsessions, as well as by the nature of
the repetitive behaviors. In OCD the individual feels driven to perform repetitive behaviors in
response to an obsession or according to rules that must be applied rigidly, whereas in
stereotypic movement disorder the behaviors are seemingly driven but apparently purposeless.
Trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder) and excoriation (skin-picking) disorder are characterized
by body-focused repetitive behaviors (i.e., hair pulling and skin picking) that may be seemingly
driven but that are not apparently purposeless, and that may not be patterned or rhythmical.
Furthermore, onset in trichotillomania and excoriation disorder is not typically in the early
developmental period, but rather around puberty or later.
The diagnosis of stereotypic movements requires the
exclusion of habits, mannerisms, paroxysmal dyskinesias, and benign hereditary chorea. A
neurological history and examination are required to assess features suggestive of other
disorders, such as myoclonus, dystonia, tics, and chorea. Involuntary movements associated with
a neurological condition may be distinguished by their signs and symptoms. For example,
repetitive, stereotypic movements in tardive dyskinesia can be distinguished by a history of
chronic neuroleptic use and characteristic oral or facial dyskinesia or irregular trunk or limb
movements. These types of movements do not result in self-injury. Stereotypies are a common
manifestation of a variety of neurogenetic disorders, such as Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, Rett
syndrome, fragile X syndrome, Cornelia de Lange syndrome, and Smith-Magenis syndrome. For
stereotypic movement disorder that is associated with a known genetic or other medical
