Substance-induced repetitive behaviors.
Functional (conversion) stereotypies.
F95.2
F95.1
condition, neurodevelopmental disorder, or environmental factor, record stereotypic movement
disorder associated with (name of condition, disorder, or factor) (e.g., stereotypic movement
disorder associated with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome).
A diagnosis of stereotypic movement disorder is not
appropriate for repetitive skin picking or scratching associated with amphetamine intoxication or
abuse. In such cases, the diagnosis substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and
related disorder would apply.
Stereotyped 
movements 
must 
be 
distinguished 
from
functional (conversion) movements. Sudden onset, distractibility, changing pattern with
unexplained improvement or aggravation, and the coexistence of other symptoms of functional
neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder) are some of the typical features that help
identify functional stereotypies.
Comorbidity
Common comorbidities in children with chronic motor stereotypies include attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder, motor coordination problems, tics/Tourette’s disorder, and anxiety.
93
Tic Disorders
Diagnostic Criteria
Note: A tic is a sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic motor movement or
vocalization.
Tourette’s Disorder
A. Both multiple motor and one or more vocal tics have been present at
some time during the illness, although not necessarily concurrently.
B. The tics may wax and wane in frequency but have persisted for more than 1 year
since first tic onset.
C. Onset is before age 18 years.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., cocaine) or another medical condition (e.g., Huntington’s disease, postviral
encephalitis).
Persistent (Chronic) Motor or Vocal Tic Disorder
A. Single or multiple motor or vocal tics have been present during the
illness, but not both motor and vocal.
B. The tics may wax and wane in frequency but have persisted for more than 1 year
since first tic onset.
