F95.0
C. Onset is before age 18 years.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., cocaine) or another medical condition (e.g., Huntington’s disease, postviral
encephalitis).
E. Criteria have never been met for Tourette’s disorder.
Specify if:
With motor tics only
With vocal tics only
Provisional Tic Disorder
A. Single or multiple motor and/or vocal tics.
B. The tics have been present for less than 1 year since first tic onset.
C. Onset is before age 18 years.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., cocaine) or another medical condition (e.g., Huntington’s disease, postviral
encephalitis).
E. Criteria have never been met for Tourette’s disorder or persistent (chronic) motor
or vocal tic disorder.
Specifiers
The “motor tics only” or “vocal tics only” specifier is only required for persistent (chronic)
motor or vocal tic disorder.
Diagnostic Features
Tic disorders comprise five diagnostic categories: Tourette’s disorder, persistent (chronic) motor
or vocal tic disorder, provisional tic disorder, and the other specified and unspecified tic
disorders. Diagnosis for any of the specific tic disorders is based on the presence of motor and/or
vocal tics (Criterion A), duration of tics (Criterion B), age at onset (Criterion C), and absence of
any known cause such as another medical condition or substance use (Criterion D). The tic
disorder diagnoses are hierarchical in order (i.e., Tourette’s disorder, followed by persistent
[chronic] motor or vocal tic disorder, followed by provisional tic
94
disorder, followed by the other specified and unspecified tic disorders). Once a tic disorder at
one level of the hierarchy is diagnosed, a lower hierarchy diagnosis cannot be made (Criterion
E).
Tics are typically sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic motor movements or vocalizations.
Some motor tics can be slower twisting or tightening movements that occur over varying lengths
of time. An individual may exhibit various tics over time, but, at any point in time, the tic
repertoire may recur in a characteristic fashion. Although tics can include almost any muscle
group or vocalization, certain tics, such as eye blinking or throat clearing, are common across
