patient populations. There is often a localized uncomfortable sensation (premonitory sensation)
prior to a tic, and most individuals report an “urge” to tic. Consequently, tics are generally
experienced as involuntary, but some tics can be voluntarily suppressed for varying lengths of
time.
Explicit discussion of tics can serve as a trigger. Likewise, observing a gesture or sound in
another person may result in an individual with a tic disorder making a similar gesture or sound,
which may be incorrectly perceived by others as purposeful. This can be particularly problematic
when the individual is interacting with authority figures who do not have an adequate
understanding of tic disorders (e.g., teachers, supervisors, police).
Tics are classically categorized as either simple or complex. Simple motor tics are
characterized by the limited involvement of specific muscle groups, often are of short duration,
and can include eye blinks, facial grimaces, shoulder shrugs, or extension of the extremities.
Simple vocal tics include throat clearing, sniffs, chirps, barks, or grunting often caused by
contraction of the diaphragm or muscles of the oropharynx. Complex motor tics are of longer
duration and often include a combination of simple tics such as simultaneous head turning and
shoulder shrugging. Complex tics can appear purposeful, such as head gestures or torso
movements. They can also include imitations of someone else’s movements (echopraxia) or
sexual or taboo gestures (copropraxia). Similarly, complex vocal tics have linguistic meaning
(words or partial words) and can include repeating one’s own sounds or words (palilalia),
repeating the last-heard word or phrase (echolalia), or uttering socially unacceptable words,
including obscenities, or ethnic, racial, or religious slurs (coprolalia). Importantly, coprolalia is
an abrupt, sharp bark or grunt utterance and lacks the prosody of similar inappropriate speech
observed in human interactions.
The presence of motor and/or vocal tics varies across the five tic disorders (Criterion A). For
Tourette’s disorder, both motor and vocal tics must be present (though not necessarily
concurrently), whereas for persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder, only motor or only
vocal tics are present. For provisional tic disorder, motor and/or vocal tics may be present. For
other specified or unspecified tic disorders, the tics or tic-like symptoms are best characterized as
tics but are atypical in presentation or age at onset, or have a known etiology.
The 1-year minimum duration criterion (Criterion B) assures that individuals diagnosed with
either Tourette’s disorder or persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder have had persistent
symptoms. Tics wax and wane in severity, and some individuals may have tic-free intervals of
weeks to months; however, an individual who has had tics of greater than 1 year’s duration since
first tic onset would be considered to have persistent symptoms regardless of intermittent tic-free
periods. For an individual with motor and/or vocal tics for less than 1 year since first tic onset, a
provisional tic disorder diagnosis can be considered. The onset of tics must occur prior to age 18
years (Criterion C). Tic disorders typically begin in the prepubertal period, with an average age
at onset between 4 and 6 years, and with the incidence of first-onset tic disorders decreasing in
the later teen years. First onset of tics in adulthood is exceedingly rare and is often associated
with exposures to illicit substances (e.g., excessive cocaine use), is the result of a central nervous
system insult, or is related to a functional neurological disorder. Although first onset of tics is
uncommon in teenagers and adults, it is not uncommon for adolescents and adults to present for
an initial diagnostic assessment and, when carefully evaluated, provide a history of milder tics
dating
