95
back to childhood, even if earlier phases of development included tic-free periods of months
or years. First-onset abnormal movements suggestive of tics that occur outside of the usual age
range should result in evaluation for other movement disorders, including functional tic-like
complex movements or vocalizations.
Tics cannot be attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another medical
condition (Criterion D). When there is strong evidence from the history, physical examination,
and/or laboratory results to suggest a plausible, proximal, and probable cause for a tic disorder, a
diagnosis of other specified tic disorder should be used.
Having previously met diagnostic criteria for Tourette’s disorder negates a possible diagnosis
of persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder (Criterion E). Similarly, a previous diagnosis
of persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder negates a diagnosis of provisional tic disorder
or other specified or unspecified tic disorder (Criterion E).
Prevalence
Tics are common in childhood but transient in most cases. A national survey in the United States
estimated 3 per 1,000 for the prevalence of clinically identified cases. The frequency of
identified cases was lower among African Americans and Latinx individuals, which may be
related to differences in access to care. The estimated prevalence of Tourette’s disorder in
Canada ranges from 3 to 9 per 1,000 in school-age children. Globally, males are more commonly
affected than females, with the ratio varying from 2:1 to 4:1. Epidemiological studies have
shown tics to be present in children from all continents, but exact prevalence rates are influenced
by methodological differences in research.
Development and Course
First onset of tics is typically between ages 4 and 6 years. Eye blinking is highly characteristic as
an initial symptom. Peak severity occurs between ages 10 and 12 years, with a decline in severity
during adolescence. Many adults with tic disorders experience diminished symptoms. However,
a percentage of individuals will have persistently severe or worsening symptoms in adulthood.
Tics manifest similarly in all age groups and across the lifespan. Tics wax and wane in
severity (frequency and intensity) and over time change with regard to the affected muscle
groups and nature of vocalizations. Many individuals, including young children, report that their
tics are associated with a localized bodily sensation preceding the tic and a premonitory urge to
move. It can be difficult to find words to describe these premonitory sensations and urges. Tics
associated with a premonitory urge may be experienced as not completely “involuntary” in that
the urge and the tic can be resisted. An individual may also feel the need to perform a tic
repeatedly or in a specific way until the individual feels that the tic has been done “just right.”
Often there is a feeling of relief and tension reduction following the expression of the tic or a
series of tics.
The vulnerability toward developing co-occurring conditions changes as individuals pass
through the age of risk for various co-occurring conditions. For example, prepubertal children
with tic disorders are more likely to exhibit co-occurring attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD), obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), and separation anxiety disorder. Teenagers and
adults are more vulnerable to developing mood and anxiety disorders as well as substance use
