Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Course modifiers.
disorders.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Early in brain development, a number of environmental risk factors have been
identified, including advanced paternal age as well as pre- and perinatal adverse events (e.g.,
impaired fetal growth, maternal intrapartum fever, maternal smoking, severe maternal
psychosocial stress, preterm birth, breech presentation, and cesarean delivery).
96
Genetic factors influence tic expression and severity. The heritability of
tic disorders is estimated to be 70%–85%, and there are no differences in familial risk or
heritability between males and females. Important risk alleles for Tourette’s disorder and rare
genetic variants in families with tic disorders have been identified. Common genetic variants
have also been identified. They are shared across tic disorders in a graded fashion that correlates
with disease severity. Indeed, tic disorders likely exist along a continuous developmental
spectrum, based on both their phenomenology and their genetic background.
Chronic tic disorders have shared genetic variance with OCD, ADHD, and other
neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism spectrum disorder. In addition, individuals with
tic disorders are at increased risk to develop an autoimmune disorder (e.g., Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis). It is increasingly evident that the immune system and neuroinflammation play
important roles in the pathobiology of tics in at least a subset of affected individuals (e.g., those
with Sydenham's chorea). However, more work is needed to understand the biobehavioral
underpinnings and the potential causative role of infections for other neuropsychiatric conditions,
including pediatric acute-onset neuropsychiatric syndrome and pediatric autoimmune
neuropsychiatric disorder associated with streptococcal infections.
Tics are increased by anxiety, excitement, and exhaustion and are better during
calm, focused activities. For example, many individuals typically have fewer tics when engaged
in tasks that require focused attention and motor control. Stressful/exciting events (e.g., taking a
test, participating in exciting activities) often make tics worse.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Tic disorders do not appear to vary in clinical characteristics, course, or etiology by ethnic,
racialized, and cultural background, but these backgrounds may affect how tic disorders are
perceived and managed in the family and community, influencing patterns of help seeking and
choices of treatment, such as age at presentation at specialty services. For example, preferred
social distance from individuals with tic disorders (e.g., when working or studying together) was
greater in a Korean sample than in U.S. studies.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Males are more commonly affected than females, but there are no sex differences in the kinds of
tics, age at onset, or course. Women with persistent tic disorders may be more likely to
experience anxiety and depression.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
