Abnormal movements that may accompany other medical conditions, including other
movement disorders.
Paroxysmal dyskinesias.
A matched case-cohort study in Sweden from 1969 to 2013 demonstrated that individuals with
Tourette’s disorder or persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder have a substantially
increased risk of suicide attempts (odds ratio 3.86) and suicide death (odds ratio 4.39), even after
adjustment for psychiatric comorbidities, compared with matched general population control
subjects. Persistence of tics after young adulthood and a prior suicide attempt were the strongest
predictors of suicide death. Case-control data suggest that about 1 in 10 youth with persistent
(chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder has suicidal thoughts and/or behaviors, particularly in the
context of anger/frustration and associated with anxiety/depression, social problems or
withdrawal, aggression and internalizing problems, tic severity, and related impairment.
Functional Consequences of Tic Disorders
Many individuals with mild to moderate tic severity experience no distress or impairment in
functioning and may even be unaware of their tics. Individuals with more severe
97
symptoms generally have more impairment in daily living, but even individuals with moderate or
even severe tic disorders may function well. The presence of a co-occurring condition, such as
ADHD or OCD, can have greater impact on functioning than the tics themselves. Less
commonly, tics disrupt functioning in daily activities and result in social isolation, interpersonal
conflict, peer victimization, inability to work or to go to school, and lower quality of life. Often
individuals with tics have difficulty focusing their attention on work-related tasks while they are
actively trying to suppress their tics. The individual also may experience substantial
psychological distress and even suicidal thoughts. Rare complications of Tourette’s disorder
include physical injury, such as eye injury (from hitting oneself in the face), and orthopedic and
neurological injury (e.g., disc disease related to forceful head and neck movements).
Differential Diagnosis
Motor stereotypies are defined as involuntary rhythmic, repetitive, predictable movements that
appear purposeful but serve no obvious adaptive function. They are often self-soothing or
pleasurable and stop with distraction. Examples include repetitive hand waving/rotating, arm
flapping, and finger wiggling. Motor stereotypies can usually be differentiated from tics based on
the former’s earlier age at onset (often younger than 3 years), prolonged duration (seconds to
minutes), being repetitive and rhythmic in form and location, lacking a premonitory sensation or
urge, and cessation with distraction (e.g., hearing name called or being touched). Chorea
represents rapid, random, continual, abrupt, irregular, unpredictable, nonstereotyped actions that
are usually bilateral and affect all parts of the body (i.e., face, trunk, and limbs). The timing,
direction, and distribution of movements vary from moment to moment, and movements usually
worsen during attempted voluntary action. Dystonia is the simultaneous sustained contraction of
both agonist and antagonist muscles, resulting in a distorted posture or movement of parts of the
body. Dystonic postures are often triggered by attempts at voluntary movements and are not seen
during sleep.
Paroxysmal dyskinesias are characterized by episodic involuntary
