Myoclonus.
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
Functional tic disorder.
dystonic or choreoathetoid movements that are precipitated by voluntary movement or exertion
and less commonly arise from normal background activity.
Myoclonus is characterized by a sudden unidirectional movement that is often
nonrhythmic. It may be worsened by movement and occur during sleep. Myoclonus is
differentiated from tics by its rapidity, lack of suppressibility, and absence of a premonitory
sensation or urge.
Differentiating compulsions in OCD from complex
tics may be difficult, especially because they frequently co-occur in the same individual. The
compulsions of OCD are aimed at preventing or reducing anxiety or distress and are usually
performed in response to an obsession (e.g., fear of contamination). In contrast, many individuals
with a tic disorder feel the need to perform the action in a particular fashion, equally on both
sides of the body a certain number of times or until a “just right” feeling is achieved. Body-
focused repetitive behavior disorders (i.e., persistent hair-pulling, skin-picking, nail-biting) are
more goal-directed and complex than tics.
Functional disorders should also be considered when an individual
presents with “tic attacks” that can go on for extended periods of time lasting from 15 minutes to
several hours.
Comorbidity
Many medical and psychiatric conditions have been described as co-occurring with tic disorders,
and ADHD, disruptive behavior, and OCD and related disorders are particularly
98
common. Children with ADHD may demonstrate disruptive behavior, social immaturity, and
learning difficulties that may interfere with academic progress and interpersonal relationships
and lead to greater impairment than that caused by a tic disorder. The obsessive-compulsive
symptoms observed in tic disorders tend to have an earlier age at onset and often are
characterized by a need for symmetry and exactness and/or forbidden or taboo thoughts (e.g.,
aggressive, sexual, or religious obsessions and related compulsions). Individuals with tic
disorders can also have other movement disorders (e.g., Sydenham’s chorea, stereotypic
movement disorder) and other neurodevelopmental and psychiatric conditions, such as autism
spectrum disorder and specific learning disorder. As noted earlier, teenagers and adults with a tic
disorder are at increased risk for developing a mood, anxiety, or substance use disorder.
Other Specified Tic Disorder
F95.8
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a tic
disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet
the full criteria for a tic disorder or any of the disorders in the neurodevelopmental
