Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic
Disorders
Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders include schizophrenia, other
psychotic disorders, and schizotypal (personality) disorder. They are defined by abnormalities in
one or more of the following five domains: delusions, hallucinations, disorganized thinking
(speech), grossly disorganized or abnormal motor behavior (including catatonia), and negative
symptoms.
Key Features That Define the Psychotic Disorders
Delusions
Delusions are fixed beliefs that are not amenable to change in light of conflicting evidence. Their
content may include a variety of themes (e.g., persecutory, referential, somatic, religious,
grandiose). Persecutory delusions (i.e., belief that one is going to be harmed, harassed, and so
forth by an individual, organization, or other group) are most common. Referential delusions
(i.e., belief that certain gestures, comments, environmental cues, and so forth are directed at
oneself) are also common. Grandiose delusions (i.e., when an individual believes that he or she
has exceptional abilities, wealth, or fame) and erotomanic delusions (i.e., when an individual
believes falsely that another person is in love with him or her) are also seen. Nihilistic delusions
involve the conviction that a major catastrophe will occur, and somatic delusions focus on
preoccupations regarding health and organ function.
Delusions are deemed bizarre if they are clearly implausible and not understandable to same-
culture peers and do not derive from ordinary life experiences. An example of a bizarre delusion
is the belief that an outside force has removed his or her internal organs and replaced them with
someone else’s organs without leaving any wounds or scars. An example of a nonbizarre
delusion is the belief that one is under surveillance by the police, despite a lack of convincing
evidence. Delusions that express a loss of control over mind or body are generally considered to
be bizarre; these include the belief that one’s thoughts have been “removed” by some outside
force (thought withdrawal), that alien thoughts have been put into one’s mind (thought
insertion), or that one’s body or actions are being acted on or manipulated by some outside force
(delusions of control).
The distinction between a delusion and a strongly held idea is sometimes difficult to
determine and depends in part on the degree of conviction with which the belief is held despite
clear or reasonable contradictory evidence regarding its veracity. Assessing delusions in
individuals from a variety of cultural backgrounds can be difficult. Some religious and
supernatural beliefs (e.g., evil eye, causing illness through curses, influence of spirits) may be
viewed as bizarre and possibly delusional in some cultural contexts but be generally accepted in
