others. However, elevated religiosity can be a feature of many presentations of psychosis.
Individuals who have experienced torture, political violence, or discrimination can report
fears that may be misjudged as persecutory delusions; these may represent instead intense fears
of recurrence or posttraumatic symptoms. A careful evaluation of whether the
102
person’s fears are justified given the nature of the trauma can help to differentiate appropriate
fears from persecutory delusions.
Hallucinations
Hallucinations are perception-like experiences that occur without an external stimulus. They are
vivid and clear, with the full force and impact of normal perceptions, and not under voluntary
control. They may occur in any sensory modality, but auditory hallucinations are the most
common in schizophrenia and related disorders. Auditory hallucinations are usually experienced
as voices, whether familiar or unfamiliar, that are perceived as distinct from the individual’s own
thoughts. The hallucinations must occur in the context of a clear sensorium; those that occur
while falling asleep (hypnagogic) or waking up (hypnopompic) are considered to be within the
range of normal experience. Hallucinations may be a normal part of religious experience in
certain cultural contexts.
Disorganized Thinking (Speech)
Disorganized thinking (formal thought disorder) is typically inferred from the individual’s
speech. The individual may switch from one topic to another (derailment or loose associations).
Answers to questions may be obliquely related or completely unrelated (tangentiality). Rarely,
speech may be so severely disorganized that it is nearly incomprehensible and resembles
receptive aphasia in its linguistic disorganization (incoherence or “word salad”). Because mildly
disorganized speech is common and nonspecific, the symptom must be severe enough to
substantially impair effective communication. The severity of the impairment may be difficult to
evaluate if the person making the diagnosis comes from a different linguistic background than
that of the person being examined. For example, some religious groups engage in glossolalia
(“speaking in tongues”); others describe experiences of possession trance (trance states in which
personal identity is replaced by an external possessing identity). These phenomena are
characterized by disorganized speech. These instances do not represent signs of psychosis unless
they are accompanied by other clearly psychotic symptoms. Less severe disorganized thinking or
speech may occur during the prodromal and residual periods of schizophrenia.
Grossly Disorganized or Abnormal Motor Behavior (Including
Catatonia)
Grossly disorganized or abnormal motor behavior may manifest itself in a variety of ways,
ranging from childlike “silliness” to unpredictable agitation. Problems may be noted in any form
of goal-directed behavior, leading to difficulties in performing activities of daily living.
Catatonic behavior is a marked decrease in reactivity to the environment. This ranges from
resistance to instructions (negativism); to maintaining a rigid, inappropriate or bizarre posture; to
a complete lack of verbal and motor responses (mutism and stupor). It can also include
