purposeless and excessive motor activity without obvious cause (catatonic excitement). Other
features are repeated stereotyped movements, staring, grimacing, and the echoing of speech.
Although catatonia has historically been associated with schizophrenia, catatonic symptoms are
nonspecific and may occur in other mental disorders (e.g., bipolar or depressive disorders with
catatonia) and in medical conditions (catatonic disorder due to another medical condition).
Negative Symptoms
Negative symptoms account for a substantial portion of the morbidity associated with
schizophrenia but are less prominent in other psychotic disorders. Two negative symptoms are
particularly prominent in schizophrenia: diminished emotional expression and avolition.
Diminished emotional expression includes reductions in the expression of emotions in the
103
face, eye contact, intonation of speech (prosody), and movements of the hand, head, and face that
normally give an emotional emphasis to speech. Avolition is a decrease in motivated self-
initiated purposeful activities. The individual may sit for long periods of time and show little
interest in participating in work or social activities. Other negative symptoms include alogia,
anhedonia, and asociality. Alogia is manifested by diminished speech output. Anhedonia is the
decreased ability to experience pleasure. Individuals with schizophrenia can still enjoy a
pleasurable activity in the moment and can recall it, but show a reduction in the frequency of
engaging in pleasurable activity. Asociality refers to the apparent lack of interest in social
interactions and may be associated with avolition, but it can also be a manifestation of limited
opportunities for social interactions.
Disorders in This Chapter
This chapter is organized along a gradient of psychopathology. Clinicians should first consider
conditions that do not reach full criteria for a psychotic disorder or are limited to one domain of
psychopathology. Then they should consider time-limited conditions. Finally, the diagnosis of a
schizophrenia spectrum disorder requires the exclusion of another condition that may give rise to
psychosis.
Schizotypal personality disorder is noted within this chapter as it is considered within the
schizophrenia spectrum, although its full description is found in the chapter “Personality
Disorders.” The diagnosis schizotypal personality disorder captures a pervasive pattern of social
and interpersonal deficits, including reduced capacity for close relationships; cognitive or
perceptual distortions; and eccentricities of behavior, usually beginning by early adulthood but in
some cases first becoming apparent in childhood and adolescence. Abnormalities of beliefs,
thinking, and perception are below the threshold for the diagnosis of a psychotic disorder.
Two conditions are defined by abnormalities limited to one domain of psychosis: delusions
or catatonia. Delusional disorder is characterized by at least 1 month of delusions but no other
psychotic symptoms. Catatonia is described later in the chapter and further in this discussion.
Brief psychotic disorder lasts more than 1 day and remits by 1 month. Schizophreniform
disorder is characterized by a symptomatic presentation equivalent to that of schizophrenia
except for its duration (less than 6 months) and the absence of a requirement for a decline in
