functioning.
Schizophrenia lasts for at least 6 months and includes at least 1 month of active-phase
symptoms. In schizoaffective disorder, a mood episode and the active-phase symptoms of
schizophrenia occur together and were preceded or are followed by at least 2 weeks of delusions
or hallucinations without prominent mood symptoms.
Psychotic disorders may be induced by substances, medications, toxins, and other medical
conditions. In substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder, the psychotic symptoms are
judged to be a direct physiological consequence of a drug of abuse, a medication, or toxin
exposure and cease after removal of the agent. In psychotic disorder due to another medical
condition, the psychotic symptoms are judged to be a direct physiological consequence of
another medical condition.
Catatonia can occur in several disorders, including neurodevelopmental, psychotic, bipolar,
depressive, and other mental disorders. This chapter also includes the diagnoses catatonia
associated with another mental disorder (catatonia specifier), catatonic disorder due to another
medical condition, and unspecified catatonia, and the diagnostic criteria for all three conditions
are described together.
Other specified and unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders are
included for classifying psychotic presentations that do not meet the criteria for any of the
specific psychotic disorders, or psychotic symptomatology about which there is inadequate or
contradictory information.
104
Clinician-Rated Assessment of Symptoms and Related Clinical
Phenomena in Psychosis
Psychotic disorders are heterogeneous, and the severity of symptoms can predict important
aspects of the illness, such as the degree of cognitive or neurobiological deficits. To move the
field forward, a detailed framework for the assessment of severity is included in Section III,
“Assessment Measures,” which may help with treatment planning, prognostic decision-making,
and research on pathophysiological mechanisms. Section III, “Assessment Measures,” also
contains dimensional assessments of the primary symptoms of psychosis, including
hallucinations, delusions, disorganized speech (except for substance/medication-induced
psychotic disorder and psychotic disorder due to another medical condition), abnormal
psychomotor behavior, and negative symptoms, as well as dimensional assessments of
depression and mania. The severity of mood symptoms in psychosis has prognostic value and
guides treatment. Thus, dimensional assessments of depression and mania for all psychotic
disorders alert clinicians to mood pathology and the need to treat where appropriate. The Section
III scale also includes a dimensional assessment of cognitive impairment. Many individuals with
psychotic disorders have impairments in a range of cognitive domains that predict functional
status. Clinical neuropsychological assessment can help guide diagnosis and treatment, but brief
assessments without formal neuropsychological assessment can provide useful information that
can be sufficient for diagnostic purposes. Formal neuropsychological testing, when conducted,
should be administered and scored by personnel trained in the use of testing instruments. If a
