F22
formal neuropsychological assessment is not conducted, the clinician should use the best
available information to make a judgment. Further research on these assessments is necessary to
determine their clinical utility; thus, the assessments available in Section III should serve as a
prototype to stimulate such research.
Cultural Considerations in the Assessment of Psychotic Symptoms
Diagnostic accuracy and the quality of treatment planning may be enhanced by interview
approaches, scales, and tools that have been adapted or validated for the person’s culture and by
using a cultural formulation interview (see Section III, “Culture and Psychiatric Diagnosis”).
Assessing psychosis through interpreters or in a second or third language must avoid the
misunderstanding of unfamiliar metaphors as delusions.
Schizotypal (Personality) Disorder
Criteria and text for schizotypal personality disorder can be found in the chapter “Personality
Disorders.” Because this disorder is considered part of the schizophrenia spectrum of disorders,
and is labeled in this section of ICD-10 as schizotypal disorder, it is listed in this chapter and
discussed in detail in the DSM-5 chapter “Personality Disorders.”
Delusional Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. The presence of one (or more) delusions with a duration of 1 month or longer.
B. Criterion A for schizophrenia has never been met.
Note: Hallucinations, if present, are not prominent and are related to the
delusional theme (e.g., the sensation of being infested with insects associated
with delusions of infestation).
105
C. Apart from the impact of the delusion(s) or its ramifications, functioning is not
markedly impaired, and behavior is not obviously bizarre or odd.
D. If manic or major depressive episodes have occurred, these have been brief
relative to the duration of the delusional periods.
E. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or
another medical condition and is not better explained by another mental
disorder, such as body dysmorphic disorder or obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Specify whether:
Erotomanic type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion
is that another person is in love with the individual.
