Grandiose type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion is
the conviction of having some great (but unrecognized) talent or insight or having
made some important discovery.
Jealous type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the individual’s
delusion is that his or her spouse or lover is unfaithful.
Persecutory type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion
involves the individual’s belief that he or she is being conspired against, cheated,
spied on, followed, poisoned or drugged, maliciously maligned, harassed, or
obstructed in the pursuit of long-term goals.
Somatic type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion
involves bodily functions or sensations.
Mixed type: This subtype applies when no one delusional theme predominates.
Unspecified type: This subtype applies when the dominant delusional belief
cannot be clearly determined or is not described in the specific types (e.g.,
referential delusions without a prominent persecutory or grandiose component).
Specify if:
With bizarre content: Delusions are deemed bizarre if they are clearly
implausible, not understandable, and not derived from ordinary life experiences
(e.g., an individual’s belief that a stranger has removed his or her internal organs
and replaced them with someone else’s organs without leaving any wounds or
scars).
Specify if:
The following course specifiers are only to be used after a 1-year duration of the
disorder:
First episode, currently in acute episode: First manifestation of the disorder
meeting the defining diagnostic symptom and time criteria. An acute episode is a
time period in which the symptom criteria are fulfilled.
First episode, currently in partial remission: Partial remission is a time period
during which an improvement after a previous episode is maintained and in
which the defining criteria of the disorder are only partially fulfilled.
First episode, currently in full remission: Full remission is a period of time
after a previous episode during which no disorder-specific symptoms are
present.
Multiple episodes, currently in acute episode
Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission
Multiple episodes, currently in full remission
Continuous: Symptoms fulfilling the diagnostic symptom criteria of the disorder
are remaining for the majority of the illness course, with subthreshold symptom
periods being very brief relative to the overall course.
Unspecified
