Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of
psychosis, including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal
psychomotor
106
behavior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its
current severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from
0 (not present) to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of
Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
Note: Diagnosis of delusional disorder can be made without using this severity
specifier.
Subtypes
In erotomanic type, the central theme of the delusion is that another person is in love with the
individual. The person about whom this conviction is held is usually of higher status (e.g., a
famous individual or a superior at work) but can be a complete stranger. Efforts to contact the
object of the delusion are common. In grandiose type, the central theme of the delusion is the
conviction of having some great talent or insight or of having made some important discovery.
Less commonly, the individual may have the delusion of having a special relationship with a
prominent individual or of being a prominent person (in which case the actual individual may be
regarded as an impostor). Grandiose delusions may have a religious content. In jealous type, the
central theme of the delusion is that of an unfaithful partner. This belief is arrived at without due
cause and is based on incorrect inferences supported by small bits of “evidence” (e.g., disarrayed
clothing). The individual with the delusion usually confronts the spouse or lover and attempts to
intervene in the imagined infidelity. In persecutory type, the central theme of the delusion
involves the individual’s belief of being conspired against, cheated, spied on, followed,
poisoned, maliciously maligned, harassed, or obstructed in the pursuit of long-term goals. Small
slights may be exaggerated and become the focus of a delusional system. The affected individual
may engage in repeated attempts to obtain satisfaction by legal or legislative action. Individuals
with persecutory delusions are often resentful and angry and may resort to violence against those
they believe are hurting them. In somatic type, the central theme of the delusion involves bodily
functions or sensations. Somatic delusions can occur in several forms. Most common is the belief
that the individual emits a foul odor; that there is an infestation of insects on or in the skin; that
there is an internal parasite; or that parts of the body are not functioning.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of delusional disorder is the presence of one or more delusions that persist
for at least 1 month (Criterion A). A diagnosis of delusional disorder is not given if the
individual has ever had a symptom presentation that met Criterion A for schizophrenia (Criterion
B). Apart from the direct impact of the delusions, impairments in psychosocial functioning may
be more circumscribed than those seen in other psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia, and
behavior is not obviously bizarre or odd (Criterion C). If mood episodes occur concurrently with
