Genetic and physiological.
the delusions, the total duration of these mood episodes is brief relative to the total duration of
the delusional periods (Criterion D). The delusions are not attributable to the physiological
effects of a substance (e.g., cocaine) or another medical condition (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease) and
are not better explained by another mental disorder, such as body dysmorphic disorder or
obsessive-compulsive disorder (Criterion E).
In addition to the delusions identified in the diagnostic criteria, the assessment of cognition,
depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making critically important distinctions
between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders. Whereas delusions
are a sine qua non of delusional disorder, hallucinations and negative symptoms are uncommon
and disorganization is rare. By definition, the presence of catatonia in conjunction with delusions
rules out delusional disorder, because Criterion A for schizophrenia would be met. A subset of
cases has prominent depressive symptoms, but cognitive impairment and mania are rarely
demonstrated.
107
Associated Features
Social, marital, or work problems can result from the delusional beliefs of delusional disorder.
Individuals with delusional disorder may be able to factually describe that others view their
beliefs as irrational but are unable to accept this themselves (i.e., there may be “factual insight”
but no true insight). Many individuals develop irritable or dysphoric mood, which can sometimes
be understood as a reaction to their delusional beliefs. Anger and violent behavior can occur with
persecutory, jealous, and erotomanic types. The individual may engage in litigious or
antagonistic behavior (e.g., sending hundreds of letters of protest to the government). Legal
difficulties can occur, particularly in jealous and erotomanic types.
Prevalence
The lifetime prevalence of delusional disorder has been estimated at around 0.2% in a Finnish
sample, and the most frequent subtype is persecutory. Delusional disorder, jealous type, is
probably more common in men than in women, but there are no major sex or gender differences
in the overall frequency of delusional disorder or in the content of the delusions.
Development and Course
On average, global functioning is generally better than that observed in schizophrenia. Although
the diagnosis is generally stable, a proportion of individuals go on to develop schizophrenia.
Whereas about a third of individuals with delusional disorder of 1–3 months’ duration
subsequently receive a diagnosis of schizophrenia, the diagnosis of delusional disorder is much
less likely to change if the duration of the disorder is greater than 6–12 months. Although
delusional disorder can occur in younger age groups, it may be more prevalent in older
individuals.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Delusional disorder has a significant familial relationship with both
schizophrenia and schizotypal personality disorder.
