Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
Delirium, major neurocognitive disorder, and psychotic disorder due to another medical
condition.
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder.
Schizophrenia and schizophreniform disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
An individual’s cultural and religious background must be taken into account in evaluating the
possible presence of delusional disorder; in fact, some traditional beliefs unfamiliar to Western
cultures may be wrongly labeled as delusional, so their context must be carefully assessed. The
nature and content of delusions also vary among different cultural groups.
Functional Consequences of Delusional Disorder
The functional impairment is usually more circumscribed than that seen with other psychotic
disorders, although in some cases, the impairment may be substantial and include poor
occupational functioning and social isolation. When poor psychosocial functioning is present,
delusional beliefs themselves often play a significant role. A common characteristic of
individuals with delusional disorder is the apparent normality of their behavior and appearance
when their delusional ideas are not being discussed or acted on. Men with delusional disorder
generally have more severe symptoms and worse functional outcomes compared with women.
Differential Diagnosis
If an individual with obsessive-compulsive disorder is
completely convinced that his or her obsessive-compulsive disorder beliefs are true, then the
diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive disorder, with absent insight/delusional
108
beliefs specifier, should be given rather than a diagnosis of delusional disorder. Similarly, if an
individual with body dysmorphic disorder is completely convinced that his or her body
dysmorphic disorder beliefs are true, then the diagnosis of body dysmorphic disorder, with
absent insight/delusional beliefs specifier, should be given rather than a diagnosis of delusional
disorder.
Individuals with these disorders may present with symptoms that suggest delusional disorder.
For example, simple persecutory delusions in the context of major neurocognitive disorder
would be diagnosed as major neurocognitive disorder, with behavioral disturbance.
A 
substance/medication-induced 
psychotic
disorder cross-sectionally may be identical in symptomatology to delusional disorder but can be
distinguished by the chronological relationship of substance use to the onset and remission of the
delusional beliefs.
Delusional disorder can be distinguished from
schizophrenia and schizophreniform disorder by the absence of the other characteristic
symptoms of the active phase of schizophrenia. Furthermore, the quality of delusions can help
distinguish between schizophrenia and delusional disorder. In schizophrenia, delusions show
greater disorganization (the degree to which delusions are internally consistent, logical, and
systematized), whereas in delusional disorder, they show greater conviction (the degree to which
the individual is convinced of the reality of the delusion), greater extension (the degree to which
the delusion involves various areas of the individual’s life), and greater pressure (the degree to
