Depressive and bipolar disorders and schizoaffective disorder.
F23
which the individual is preoccupied and concerned with the expressed delusion).
These disorders may be distinguished
from delusional disorder by the temporal relationship between the mood disturbance and the
delusions and by the severity of the mood symptoms. If delusions occur exclusively during mood
episodes, the diagnosis is major depressive or bipolar disorder, with psychotic features. Mood
symptoms that meet full criteria for a mood episode can be superimposed on delusional disorder.
Delusional disorder can be diagnosed only if the total duration of all mood episodes remains
brief relative to the total duration of the delusional disturbance. If not, then a diagnosis of other
specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder accompanied by
other specified depressive disorder, unspecified depressive disorder, other specified bipolar and
related disorder, or unspecified bipolar and related disorder is appropriate.
Brief Psychotic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Presence of one (or more) of the following symptoms. At least one of these must
be (1), (2), or (3):
1. Delusions.
2. Hallucinations.
3. Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence).
4. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.
Note: Do not include a symptom if it is a culturally sanctioned response.
B. Duration of an episode of the disturbance is at least 1 day but less than 1 month,
with eventual full return to premorbid level of functioning.
109
C. The disturbance is not better explained by major depressive or bipolar disorder
with psychotic features or another psychotic disorder such as schizophrenia or
catatonia, and is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g.,
a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
Specify if:
With marked stressor(s) (brief reactive psychosis): If symptoms occur in
response to events that, singly or together, would be markedly stressful to
almost anyone in similar circumstances in the individual’s culture.
Without marked stressor(s): If symptoms do not occur in response to events
that, singly or together, would be markedly stressful to almost anyone in similar
circumstances in the individual’s culture.
With peripartum onset: If onset is during pregnancy or within 4 weeks
