postpartum.
Specify if:
With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental
disorder, p. 135, for definition).
Coding note: Use additional code F06.1 catatonia associated with brief
psychotic disorder to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of
psychosis, including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal
psychomotor behavior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may
be rated for its current severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point
scale ranging from 0 (not present) to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-
Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chapter “Assessment
Measures.”)
Note: Diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder can be made without using this
severity specifier.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of brief psychotic disorder is a disturbance that involves at least one of the
following positive psychotic symptoms: delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech (e.g.,
frequent derailment or incoherence), or grossly abnormal psychomotor behavior, including
catatonia (Criterion A). An episode of the disturbance lasts at least 1 day but less than 1 month,
and the individual eventually has a full return to the premorbid level of functioning (Criterion B).
The disturbance is not better explained by a depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic
features, by schizoaffective disorder, or by schizophrenia and is not attributable to the
physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a hallucinogen) or another medical condition (e.g.,
subdural hematoma) (Criterion C).
In addition to the four symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making critically
important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
Associated Features
Individuals with brief psychotic disorder typically experience emotional turmoil or
overwhelming confusion. They may have rapid shifts from one intense affect to another.
Although the disturbance is brief, the level of impairment may be severe, and supervision may be
required to ensure that nutritional and hygienic needs are met and that the individual is protected
from the consequences of poor judgment, cognitive impairment, or acting on the basis of
delusions. There appears to be an increased risk of suicidal behavior, particularly during the
acute episode.
110
Prevalence
