Other medical conditions.
Substance-related disorders.
Depressive and bipolar disorders.
Brief psychotic disorder may account for 2%–7% of cases of first-onset psychosis in several
countries.
Development and Course
Brief psychotic disorder may appear in adolescence or early adulthood, and onset can occur
across the life span, with the average age at onset being the mid 30s. By definition, a diagnosis of
brief psychotic disorder requires a full remission of all symptoms and an eventual full return to
the premorbid level of functioning within 1 month of the onset of the disturbance. In some
individuals, the duration of psychotic symptoms may be quite brief (e.g., a few days).
Although brief psychotic disorder by definition reaches a full remission within 1 month,
subsequently more than 50% of the individuals experience a relapse. Despite the possibility of
relapse, for most individuals, outcome is favorable in terms of social functioning and
symptomatology.
In less than half of cases diagnosed with DSM-IV brief psychotic disorder or ICD-10 acute
and transient psychotic disorder, the diagnosis changes—more often to schizophrenia spectrum
disorders and less often to affective disorders or to other psychotic disorders.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
It is important to distinguish symptoms of brief psychotic disorder from culturally sanctioned
response patterns. For example, in some religious ceremonies, an individual may report hearing
voices, but these do not generally persist and are not perceived as abnormal by most members of
the individual’s community. In a wide range of cultural contexts, it would be common or
expected for bereaved relatives to hear, see, or interact with the spirit of a recently deceased
loved one without notable pathological sequelae. In addition, cultural and religious background
must be taken into account when considering whether beliefs are delusional.
Differential Diagnosis
A variety of medical conditions can manifest with psychotic symptoms
of short duration. Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition or a delirium is diagnosed
when there is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory tests that the
delusions or hallucinations are the direct physiological consequence of a specific medical
condition (e.g., Cushing’s syndrome, brain tumor) (see “Psychotic Disorder Due to Another
Medical Condition” later in this chapter).
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder, substance-induced
delirium, and substance intoxication are distinguished from brief psychotic disorder by the fact
that a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, exposure to a toxin) is judged to be
etiologically related to the psychotic symptoms (see “Substance/Medication-Induced Psychotic
Disorder” later in this chapter). Laboratory tests, such as a urine drug screen or a blood alcohol
level, may be helpful in making this determination, as may a careful history of substance use
with attention to temporal relationships between substance intake and onset of the symptoms and
to the nature of the substance being used.
The diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder cannot be made if the
psychotic symptoms are better explained by a mood episode (i.e., the psychotic symptoms occur
exclusively during a full major depressive, manic, or mixed episode).
