Other psychotic disorders.
Malingering and factitious disorders.
Personality disorders.
F20.81
If the psychotic symptoms persist for 1 month or longer, the diagnosis
is either schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, depressive disorder with psychotic
features, bipolar disorder with psychotic features, or other specified or
111
unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder, depending on the other
symptoms in the presentation. The differential diagnosis between brief psychotic disorder and
schizophreniform disorder is difficult when the psychotic symptoms have remitted before 1
month in response to successful treatment with medication. Careful attention should be given to
the possibility that a recurrent disorder (e.g., bipolar disorder, recurrent acute exacerbations of
schizophrenia) may be responsible for any recurring psychotic episodes.
An episode of factitious disorder with predominantly
psychological signs and symptoms may have the appearance of brief psychotic disorder, but in
such cases there is evidence that the symptoms are intentionally produced. When malingering
involves apparently psychotic symptoms, there is usually evidence that the illness is being
feigned for an understandable goal.
In certain individuals with personality disorders, psychosocial stressors
may precipitate brief periods of psychotic symptoms. These symptoms are usually transient and
do not warrant a separate diagnosis. If psychotic symptoms persist for at least 1 day, an
additional diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder may be appropriate.
Schizophreniform Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant portion of time
during a 1-month period (or less if successfully treated). At least one of these
must be (1), (2), or (3):
1. Delusions.
2. Hallucinations.
3. Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence).
4. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.
5. Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or avolition).
B. An episode of the disorder lasts at least 1 month but less than 6 months. When
the diagnosis must be made without waiting for recovery, it should be qualified
as “provisional.”
C. Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic
features have been ruled out because either 1) no major depressive or manic
episodes have occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms, or 2) if
mood episodes have occurred during active-phase symptoms, they have been
