present for a minority of the total duration of the active and residual periods of
the illness.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
Specify if:
With good prognostic features: This specifier requires the presence of at least
two of the following features: onset of prominent psychotic symptoms within 4
weeks of the first noticeable change in usual behavior or functioning; confusion
or perplexity; good premorbid social and occupational functioning; and absence
of blunted or flat affect.
Without good prognostic features: This specifier is applied if two or more of
the above features have not been present.
Specify if:
With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental
disorder, p. 135, for definition).
112
Coding note: Use additional code F06.1 catatonia associated with
schizophreniform disorder to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of
psychosis, including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal
psychomotor behavior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may
be rated for its current severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point
scale ranging from 0 (not present) to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-
Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chapter “Assessment
Measures.”)
Note: Diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder can be made without using this
severity specifier.
Note: For additional information on Associated Features, Development and Course
(age-related factors), Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues, Sex- and Gender-Related
Diagnostic Issues, Differential Diagnosis, and Comorbidity, see the corresponding
sections in Schizophrenia.
Diagnostic Features
The characteristic symptoms of schizophreniform disorder are identical to those of schizophrenia
(Criterion A). Schizophreniform disorder is distinguished by its difference in duration: the total
duration of the illness, including prodromal, active, and residual phases, is at least 1 month but
less than 6 months (Criterion B). The duration requirement for schizophreniform disorder is
intermediate between that for brief psychotic disorder, which lasts more than 1 day and remits by
1 month, and schizophrenia, which lasts for at least 6 months. The diagnosis of schizophreniform
