Genetic and physiological.
disorder is made under two conditions: 1) when an episode of illness lasts between 1 and 6
months and the individual has already recovered, and 2) when an individual is symptomatic for
less than the 6 months’ duration required for the diagnosis of schizophrenia but has not yet
recovered. In this case, the diagnosis should be noted as “schizophreniform disorder
(provisional)” because it is uncertain if the individual will recover from the disturbance within
the 6-month period. If the disturbance persists beyond 6 months, the diagnosis should be changed
to schizophrenia.
Another distinguishing feature of schizophreniform disorder is the lack of a criterion
requiring impaired social and occupational functioning. While such impairments may potentially
be present, they are not necessary for a diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder.
In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making critically
important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
Associated Features
As with schizophrenia, currently there are no laboratory or psychometric tests for
schizophreniform disorder. There are multiple brain regions where neuroimaging,
neuropathological, and neurophysiological research has indicated abnormalities, but none are
diagnostic.
Prevalence
Incidence of schizophreniform disorder across sociocultural settings is likely similar to that
observed in schizophrenia. In the United States and other high-income countries, the incidence is
low, possibly fivefold less than that of schizophrenia. In lower-income countries, the incidence
may be higher, especially for the specifier “with good prognostic features”; in some of these
settings schizophreniform disorder may be as common as schizophrenia.
113
Development and Course
The development of schizophreniform disorder is similar to that of schizophrenia. About one-
third of individuals with an initial diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder (provisional) recover
within the 6-month period and schizophreniform disorder is their final diagnosis. The majority of
the remaining two-thirds of individuals will eventually receive a diagnosis of schizophrenia or
schizoaffective disorder.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Relatives of individuals with schizophreniform disorder have an
increased risk for schizophrenia.
Functional Consequences of Schizophreniform Disorder
For the majority of individuals with schizophreniform disorder who eventually receive a
diagnosis of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder, the functional consequences are similar to
the consequences of those disorders. Most individuals experience dysfunction in several areas of
