Other mental disorders and medical conditions.
Brief psychotic disorder.
F20.9
daily functioning, such as school or work, interpersonal relationships, and self-care. Individuals
who recover from schizophreniform disorder have better functional outcomes.
Differential Diagnosis
A wide variety of mental disorders and medical
conditions can manifest with psychotic symptoms that must be considered in the differential
diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder. These include psychotic disorder due to another medical
condition or its treatment; delirium or major neurocognitive disorder; substance/medication-
induced psychotic disorder or delirium; major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic
features; schizoaffective disorder; other specified or unspecified bipolar and related disorder;
major depressive or bipolar disorder with catatonic features; schizophrenia; delusional disorder;
other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder; schizotypal,
schizoid, or paranoid personality disorders; autism spectrum disorder; disorders presenting in
childhood with disorganized speech; attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; obsessive-
compulsive disorder; posttraumatic stress disorder; and traumatic brain injury.
Since the diagnostic criteria for schizophreniform disorder and schizophrenia differ primarily
in duration of illness, the discussion of the differential diagnosis of schizophrenia also applies to
schizophreniform disorder.
Schizophreniform disorder differs in duration from brief psychotic
disorder, which has a duration of less than 1 month.
Schizophrenia
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant portion of time
during a 1-month period (or less if successfully treated). At least one of these
must be (1), (2), or (3):
1. Delusions.
2. Hallucinations.
3. Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence).
114
4. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.
5. Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or avolition).
B. For a significant portion of the time since the onset of the disturbance, level of
functioning in one or more major areas, such as work, interpersonal relations, or
self-care, is markedly below the level achieved prior to the onset (or when the
onset is in childhood or adolescence, there is failure to achieve expected level of
interpersonal, academic, or occupational functioning).
