C. Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for at least 6 months. This 6-month
period must include at least 1 month of symptoms (or less if successfully treated)
that meet Criterion A (i.e., active-phase symptoms) and may include periods of
prodromal or residual symptoms. During these prodromal or residual periods, the
signs of the disturbance may be manifested by only negative symptoms or by
two or more symptoms listed in Criterion A present in an attenuated form (e.g.,
odd beliefs, unusual perceptual experiences).
D. Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic
features have been ruled out because either 1) no major depressive or manic
episodes have occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms, or 2) if
mood episodes have occurred during active-phase symptoms, they have been
present for a minority of the total duration of the active and residual periods of
the illness.
E. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
F. If there is a history of autism spectrum disorder or a communication disorder of
childhood onset, the additional diagnosis of schizophrenia is made only if
prominent delusions or hallucinations, in addition to the other required symptoms
of schizophrenia, are also present for at least 1 month (or less if successfully
treated).
Specify if:
The following course specifiers are only to be used after a 1-year duration of the
disorder and if they are not in contradiction to the diagnostic course criteria.
First episode, currently in acute episode: First manifestation of the disorder
meeting the defining diagnostic symptom and time criteria. An acute episode is a
time period in which the symptom criteria are fulfilled.
First episode, currently in partial remission: Partial remission is a period of
time during which an improvement after a previous episode is maintained and in
which the defining criteria of the disorder are only partially fulfilled.
First episode, currently in full remission: Full remission is a period of time
after a previous episode during which no disorder-specific symptoms are
present.
Multiple episodes, currently in acute episode: Multiple episodes may be
determined after a minimum of two episodes (i.e., after a first episode, a
remission and a minimum of one relapse).
Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission
Multiple episodes, currently in full remission
Continuous: Symptoms fulfilling the diagnostic symptom criteria of the disorder
are remaining for the majority of the illness course, with subthreshold symptom
periods being very brief relative to the overall course.
Unspecified
