Specify if:
With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental
disorder, p. 135, for definition).
Coding note: Use additional code F06.1 catatonia associated with
schizophrenia to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
115
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of
psychosis, including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal
psychomotor behavior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may
be rated for its current severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point
scale ranging from 0 (not present) to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-
Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chapter “Assessment
Measures.”)
Note: Diagnosis of schizophrenia can be made without using this severity
specifier.
Diagnostic Features
The characteristic symptoms of schizophrenia involve a range of cognitive, behavioral, and
emotional dysfunctions, but no single symptom is pathognomonic of the disorder. The diagnosis
involves the recognition of a constellation of signs and symptoms associated with impaired
occupational or social functioning. Individuals with the disorder will vary substantially on most
features, as schizophrenia is a heterogeneous clinical syndrome.
At least two Criterion A symptoms must be present for a significant portion of time during a
1-month period or longer. At least one of these symptoms must be the clear presence of
delusions (Criterion A1), hallucinations (Criterion A2), or disorganized speech (Criterion A3).
Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior (Criterion A4) and negative symptoms (Criterion A5)
may also be present. In those situations in which the active-phase symptoms remit within a
month in response to treatment, Criterion A is still met if the clinician estimates that they would
have persisted in the absence of treatment.
Schizophrenia involves impairment in one or more major areas of functioning (Criterion B).
If the disturbance begins in childhood or adolescence, the expected level of function is not
attained. Comparing the individual with unaffected siblings may be helpful. The dysfunction
persists for a substantial period during the course of the disorder and does not appear to be a
direct result of any single feature. Avolition (i.e., reduced drive to pursue goal-directed behavior;
Criterion A5) is linked to the social dysfunction described under Criterion B. There is also strong
evidence for a relationship between cognitive impairment (see the section “Associated Features”
for this disorder) and functional impairment in individuals with schizophrenia.
Some signs of the disturbance must persist for a continuous period of at least 6 months
(Criterion C). Prodromal symptoms often precede the active phase, and residual symptoms may
follow it, characterized by mild or subthreshold forms of hallucinations or delusions. Individuals
