may express a variety of unusual or odd beliefs that are not of delusional proportions (e.g., ideas
of reference or magical thinking); they may have unusual perceptual experiences (e.g., sensing
the presence of an unseen person); their speech may be generally understandable but vague; and
their behavior may be unusual but not grossly disorganized (e.g., mumbling in public). Negative
symptoms are common in the prodromal and residual phases and can be severe. Individuals who
had been socially active may become withdrawn from previous routines. Such behaviors are
often the first sign of a disorder.
Mood symptoms and full mood episodes are common in schizophrenia and may be
concurrent with active-phase symptomatology. However, as distinct from a psychotic mood
disorder, a schizophrenia diagnosis requires the presence of delusions or hallucinations in the
absence of mood episodes. In addition, mood episodes, taken in total, should be present for only
a minority of the total duration of the active and residual periods of the illness.
In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making critically
important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
116
Associated Features
Individuals with schizophrenia may display inappropriate affect (e.g., laughing in the absence of
an appropriate stimulus); a dysphoric mood that can take the form of depression, anxiety, or
anger; a disturbed sleep pattern (e.g., daytime sleeping and nighttime activity); and a lack of
interest in eating or food refusal. Depersonalization, derealization, and somatic concerns may
occur and sometimes reach delusional proportions. Anxiety and phobias are common. Cognitive
deficits in schizophrenia are common and are strongly linked to vocational and functional
impairments. These deficits can include decrements in declarative memory, working memory,
language function, and other executive functions, as well as slower processing speed.
Abnormalities in sensory processing and inhibitory capacity, as well as reductions in attention,
are also found. Some individuals with schizophrenia show social cognition deficits, including
deficits in the ability to infer the intentions of other people (theory of mind), and may attend to
and then interpret irrelevant events or stimuli as meaningful, perhaps leading to the generation of
explanatory delusions. These impairments frequently persist during symptomatic remission.
Some individuals with psychosis may lack insight or awareness of their disorder (i.e.,
anosognosia). This lack of “insight” includes unawareness of symptoms of schizophrenia and
may be present throughout the entire course of the illness. Unawareness of illness is typically a
symptom of schizophrenia itself rather than a coping strategy. It is comparable to the lack of
awareness of neurological deficits following brain damage, termed anosognosia. This symptom
is the most common predictor of nonadherence to treatment, and it predicts higher relapse rates,
increased number of involuntary treatments, poorer psychosocial functioning, aggression, and a
poorer course of illness.
Hostility and aggression can be associated with schizophrenia, although spontaneous or
random assault is uncommon. Aggression is more frequent for younger males and for individuals
with a past history of violence, nonadherence to treatment, substance abuse, and impulsivity. It
should be noted that the vast majority of persons with schizophrenia are not aggressive and are
