more frequently victimized than are individuals in the general population.
Currently, there are no radiological, laboratory, or psychometric tests for the disorder.
Differences are evident in multiple brain regions between groups of healthy individuals and
persons with schizophrenia, including evidence from neuroimaging, neuropathological, and
neurophysiological studies. Differences are also evident in cellular architecture, white matter
connectivity, and gray matter volume in a variety of regions such as the prefrontal and temporal
cortices. Reduced overall brain volume has been observed, as well as increased brain volume
reduction with age. Brain volume reductions with age are more pronounced in individuals with
schizophrenia than in healthy individuals. Finally, individuals with schizophrenia appear to differ
from individuals without the disorder in eye-tracking and electrophysiological indices.
Neurological soft signs common in individuals with schizophrenia include impairments in
motor coordination, sensory integration, and motor sequencing of complex movements; left-right
confusion; and disinhibition of associated movements. In addition, minor physical anomalies of
the face and limbs may occur.
Prevalence
The estimated lifetime prevalence of schizophrenia is approximately 0.3%–0.7%, with variation
over a fivefold range in meta-analyses of nationally representative surveys. Studies have shown
increased prevalence and incidence of schizophrenia for some groups based on migration and
refugee status, urbanicity, and the economic status and latitude of the country. It is important to
note that the reported prevalence and incidence of schizophrenia may be affected by the fact that
some groups are more likely to be misdiagnosed or overdiagnosed.
117
The sex ratio differs across samples and populations: for example, presentations with
prominent negative symptoms and longer duration of disorder (associated with poorer outcome)
show higher incidence rates for men, whereas definitions allowing for the inclusion of more
mood symptoms and brief presentations (associated with better outcome) show equivalent risks
for both sexes. A large worldwide study, which was based on a range of definitions of
schizophrenia, found no difference in prevalence between the sexes.
Development and Course
The requisite psychotic features of the schizophrenia diagnosis typically emerge between the late
teens and the mid-30s; onset prior to adolescence is rare. The peak onset age occurs in the early-
to mid-20s for men and in the late-20s for women. The onset may be abrupt or insidious, but the
majority of individuals manifest a slow and gradual development of a variety of clinically
significant signs and symptoms, particularly social withdrawal, emo-tional changes, and
cognitive changes producing a deterioration in role functioning. Half of these individuals display
depressive symptoms. Prognosis is influenced both by dura-tion and by severity of illness and
gender. Men, especially those with long duration of psychosis before treatment and lower
premorbid adjustment, have more prominent negative symptoms, cognitive impairment, and
generally worse functional outcomes than women. Sociocognitive deficits may manifest during
development and precede the emergence of psychosis, taking the form of stable impairments
during adulthood, refractory to antipsychotic medications.
