Environmental.
Course and outcome in schizophrenia are heterogeneous, and prognosis is uncertain at the
onset of psychosis. Although most individuals with schizophrenia remain vulnerable to
exacerbation of psychotic symptoms and a chronic course defined by symptoms and functional
impairment is common, many individuals experience periods of remission and even recovery.
According to a meta-analysis of 79 longitudinal studies of first-episode psychosis with more than
1 year of follow-up, the pooled remission rate (qualitatively defined as mild or absent symptoms
for at least 6 months) for first-episode schizophrenia was 56% and the pooled recovery rate
(qualitatively defined as symptomatic and functional improvement for greater than 2 years) was
30%. A different meta-analysis of 50 studies of individuals with broadly defined schizophrenia
(i.e., schizophrenia, schizophreniform, schizoaffective, or delusional disorder) found that the
median proportion of individuals who met recovery criteria (at most mild symptoms and
improvements in social and/or occupational functioning persisting for at least 2 years) was
13.5%. There is a tendency for reduced psychotic experiences during late life. In addition to
psychosis, cognitive impairment and negative symptom pathology are core features of
schizophrenia, and the course for these characteristic features is different from that of positive
psychotic symptoms. Cognition tends to decline during development prior to full psychosis and
is relatively stable over the longer term. Negative symptoms, if present during development, also
tend to be relatively stable traits over time. Negative symptoms that begin after psychosis onset
are more variable and may reflect secondary causes. A degree of chronicity is required for a
diagnosis of schizophrenia, and long-term course reflects a need for mental health care and living
support in many individuals. While schizophrenia is generally not a progressive
neurodegenerative disorder, life challenges, changing lifestyle, and persistent symptoms may
lead to progressive dysfunction in more severe chronic cases.
The essential features of schizophrenia are the same in childhood, but it is more difficult to
make the diagnosis. In children, delusions and hallucinations may be less elaborate than in
adults, and visual hallucinations are more common and should be distinguished from normal
fantasy play. Disorganized speech occurs in many disorders with childhood onset (e.g., autism
spectrum disorder), as does disorganized behavior (e.g., attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder).
These symptoms should not be attributed to schizophrenia
118
without due consideration of the more common disorders of childhood. Childhood-onset
cases tend to resemble poor-outcome adult cases, with gradual onset and prominent negative
symptoms. Children who later receive the diagnosis of schizophrenia are more likely to have
experienced nonspecific emotional-behavioral disturbances and psychopathology, intellectual
and language alterations, and subtle motor delays.
Late-onset cases (i.e., onset after age 40 years) are overrepresented by women, who may
have married. Often, the course is characterized by a predominance of psychotic symptoms with
preservation of affect and social functioning. Such late-onset cases can still meet the diagnostic
criteria for schizophrenia, but it is not yet clear whether this is the same condition as
schizophrenia diagnosed prior to midlife (e.g., prior to age 55 years).
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Season of birth has been linked to the incidence of schizophrenia, including late
