Genetic and physiological.
winter/early spring in some locations and summer for the deficit form of the disease. The
incidence of schizophrenia and related disorders may be higher for children growing up in an
urban environment, for refugees, for some migrant groups, and for socially oppressed groups
facing discrimination. There is evidence that social deprivation, social adversity, and
socioeconomic factors may be associated with increased rates of this disorder. Among
individuals with schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders, the severity of positive and
negative symptoms appears to be correlated with the severity of adverse childhood experiences,
such as trauma and neglect. Higher rates of schizophrenia for some ethnic and racialized groups
have been documented when they live in areas with lower proportions of people from the same
ethnicity or racialized group. The reasons for this are not completely clear but appear related to
several factors, including the following: 1) higher levels of discrimination or fear of
discrimination; 2) less social support and more stigmatization of those with schizophrenia; 3)
higher social isolation; and 4) decreased availability of and access to normalizing explanations of
perceptual experiences and abnormal beliefs reported by individuals at high risk for developing
schizophrenia.
There is a strong contribution for genetic factors in determining risk for
schizophrenia, although most individuals who have been diagnosed with schizophrenia have no
family history of psychosis. Liability is conferred by a spectrum of risk alleles, common and
rare, with each allele contributing only a small fraction to the total population variance. The risk
alleles identified to date are also associated with other mental disorders, including bipolar
disorder, depression, and autism spectrum disorder.
Pregnancy and birth complications with hypoxia and greater paternal age are associated with
a higher risk of schizophrenia for the developing fetus. In addition, other prenatal and perinatal
adversities, including stress, infection, malnutrition, maternal diabetes, and other medical
conditions, have been linked with schizophrenia. However, the vast majority of offspring with
these risk factors do not develop schizophrenia.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The form and content of schizophrenia symptoms can vary cross-culturally, including the
following ways: the relative proportion of visual and auditory hallucinations (e.g., while auditory
hallucinations tend to be more common than visual hallucinations around the world, the relative
proportion of visual hallucinations may be particularly higher in some regions compared with
others); the specific content of the delusions (e.g., persecutory, grandiose, somatic) and
hallucinations (e.g., command, abusive, religious); and the level of fear associated with them.
Cultural and socioeconomic factors must be considered, particularly when the individual and the
clinician do not share the same cultural and socioeconomic background. Ideas that appear to be
delusional in one cultural context (e.g., evil eye, causing illness through curses, influences of
spirits) may be commonly held in others.
119
In some cultural contexts, visual or auditory hallucinations with a religious content (e.g., hearing
God’s voice) are a normal part of religious experience. In addition, the assessment of
disorganized speech may be made difficult by linguistic variation in narrative styles across
cultures. The assessment of affect requires sensitivity to differences in styles of emotional
