expression, eye contact, and body language, which vary across cultures. If the assessment is
conducted in a language that is different from the individual’s primary language, care must be
taken to ensure that alogia is not related to linguistic barriers. In certain cultures, distress may
take the form of hallucinations or pseudo-hallucinations and overvalued ideas that may present
clinically similar to true psychosis but are normative to the individual’s subgroup. Misdiagnosis
of schizophrenia in individuals with mood disorders with psychotic features or with other
psychiatric disorders is more likely to occur in members of underserved ethnic and racialized
groups (in the United States, especially among African Americans). This may be attributable to
clinical bias, racism, or discrimination leading to limited quality of information and potential
misinterpretation of symptoms.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
A number of features distinguish the clinical expression of schizophrenia in women and men.
The age at onset is later in women, with a second midlife peak. Symptoms tend to be more
affect-laden among women, and there are more psychotic symptoms, as well as a greater
propensity for psychotic symptoms to worsen in later life. Other symptom differences include
less frequent negative symptoms and disorganization. Finally, social functioning tends to remain
better preserved in women. There are, however, frequent exceptions to these general caveats.
Psychotic symptoms have been observed to worsen during the premenstrual time period
when estrogen levels are dropping; consequently, increased psychiatric admission rates are seen
in women with schizophrenia just before and during menses. Lower estrogen levels resulting
from menopause may be another factor associated with the second peak of onset in women in
midlife. Similarly, psychotic symptoms appear to improve during pregnancy when estrogen
levels are high and worsen again postpartum when estrogen levels precipitously drop.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Approximately 5%–6% of individuals with schizophrenia die by suicide, about 20% attempt
suicide on one or more occasions, and many more have significant suicidal ideation. Suicidal
behavior is sometimes in response to command hallucinations to harm oneself or others. Suicide
risk remains high over the whole lifespan for men and women, although it may be especially
high for younger men with comorbid substance use. Other risk factors include depressive
symptoms, hopelessness, being unemployed, the period after a psychotic episode or hospital
discharge, number of psychiatric admissions, closeness to onset of illness, and older age at
illness onset. A systematic review and meta-analysis of longitudinal studies found that the odds
of suicidal behavior during follow-up after first-episode psychosis were higher among
individuals with depressive symptoms during first-episode psychosis compared with those
without. A meta-analysis of a large number of studies of the relationship of schizophrenia with
suicidal behavior found that alcohol, tobacco, and drug abuse; depression; number of
hospitalizations; physical comorbidity; and family history of depression and suicidal behavior
increased the risk of suicide attempt. Risk factors for suicide included male sex, being younger,
having a higher IQ, history of attempts, hopelessness, and poor adherence to treatment.
Functional Consequences of Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is associated with significant social and occupational dysfunction. Among
