Major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic or catatonic features.
Schizoaffective disorder.
Schizophreniform disorder and brief psychotic disorder.
Delusional disorder.
Schizotypal personality disorder.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic disorder.
Posttraumatic stress disorder.
Autism spectrum disorder or communication disorders.
individuals with schizophrenia, deficits in reading ability are more severe than what would
120
be predicted by the general cognitive impairments associated with the disorder. Such deficits can
be conceptualized as a secondary or acquired dyslexia that underlies the academic impairment
observed in schizophrenia. Making educational progress and maintaining employment are
frequently impaired by avolition or other disorder manifestations, even when the cognitive skills
are sufficient for the tasks at hand. Most individuals are employed at a lower level than their
parents, and most, particularly men, do not marry or have limited social contacts outside of their
family.
Differential Diagnosis
The 
distinction 
between
schizophrenia and major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features or with catatonia
depends on the temporal relationship between the mood disturbance and the psychosis, and on
the severity of the depressive or manic symptoms. If delusions or hallucinations occur
exclusively during a major depressive or manic episode, the diagnosis is depressive or bipolar
disorder with psychotic features.
A diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder requires that a major depressive
or manic episode occur concurrently with the active-phase symptoms and that the mood
symptoms be present for a majority of the total duration of the active periods.
These disorders are of shorter duration than
schizophrenia as specified in Criterion C, which requires 6 months of symptoms. In
schizophreniform disorder, the disturbance is present less than 6 months, and in brief psychotic
disorder, symptoms are present at least 1 day but less than 1 month.
Delusional disorder can be distinguished from schizophrenia by the absence
of the other symptoms characteristic of schizophrenia (e.g., delusions, prominent auditory or
visual hallucinations, disorganized speech, grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior, negative
symptoms).
Schizotypal personality disorder may be distinguished from
schizophrenia by subthreshold symptoms that are associated with persistent personality features.
Individuals 
with 
obsessive-
compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic disorder may present with poor or absent insight, and
the preoccupations may reach delusional proportions. But these disorders are distinguished from
schizophrenia by their prominent obsessions, compulsions, preoccupations with appearance or
body odor, hoarding, or body-focused repetitive behaviors.
Posttraumatic stress disorder may include flashbacks that have a
hallucinatory quality, and hypervigilance may reach paranoid proportions. But a traumatic event
and characteristic symptom features relating to reliving or reacting to the event are required to
make the diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder.
These disorders may also have symptoms
resembling a psychotic episode but are distinguished by their respective deficits in social
