Other mental disorders associated with a psychotic episode.
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder.
interaction with repetitive and restricted behaviors and other cognitive and communication
deficits. An individual with autism spectrum disorder or communication disorder must have
symptoms that meet full criteria for schizophrenia, with prominent hallucinations or delusions
for at least 1 month, in order to be diagnosed with schizophrenia as a comorbid condition.
The diagnosis of schizophrenia is made
only when the psychotic episode is persistent and not attributable to the physiological effects of a
substance or another medical condition. Individuals with a delirium or major or minor
neurocognitive disorder may present with psychotic symptoms,
121
but these would have a temporal relationship to the onset of cognitive changes consistent with
those disorders.
Individuals with substance/medication-induced
psychotic disorder may present with symptoms characteristic of Criterion A for schizophrenia,
but the substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder can usually be distinguished by the
chronological relationship of substance use to the onset and remission of the psychosis in the
absence of substance use.
Comorbidity
Rates of comorbidity with substance-related disorders are high in schizophrenia. Over half of
individuals with schizophrenia have tobacco use disorder and smoke cigarettes regularly.
Comorbidity with anxiety disorders is increasingly recognized in schizophrenia. Rates of
obsessive-compulsive disorder and panic disorder are elevated in individuals with schizophrenia
compared with the general population. Schizotypal or paranoid personality disorder may
sometimes precede the onset of schizophrenia.
Life expectancy is reduced in individuals with schizophrenia because of associated medical
conditions. Weight gain, diabetes, metabolic syndrome, and cardiovascular and pulmonary
disease are more common in schizophrenia than in the general population. Poor engagement in
health maintenance behaviors (e.g., cancer screening, exercise) increases the risk of chronic
disease, but other disorder factors, including medications, lifestyle, cigarette smoking, and diet,
may also play a role. A shared vulnerability for psychosis and medical conditions may explain
some of the medical comorbidity of schizophrenia.
Schizoaffective Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. An uninterrupted period of illness during which there is a major mood episode
(major depressive or manic) concurrent with Criterion A of schizophrenia.
Note: The major depressive episode must include Criterion A1: Depressed
mood.
