B. Delusions or hallucinations for 2 or more weeks in the absence of a major mood
episode (depressive or manic) during the lifetime duration of the illness.
C. Symptoms that meet criteria for a major mood episode are present for the
majority of the total duration of the active and residual portions of the illness.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of
abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
Specify whether:
F25.0 Bipolar type: This subtype applies if a manic episode is part of the
presentation. Major depressive episodes may also occur.
F25.1 Depressive type: This subtype applies if only major depressive episodes
are part of the presentation.
Specify if:
With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental
disorder, p. 135, for definition).
Coding note: Use additional code F06.1 catatonia associated with
schizoaffective disorder to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
Specify if:
The following course specifiers are only to be used after a 1-year duration of the
disorder and if they are not in contradiction to the diagnostic course criteria.
122
First episode, currently in acute episode: First manifestation of the disorder
meeting the defining diagnostic symptom and time criteria. An acute episode is a
time period in which the symptom criteria are fulfilled.
First episode, currently in partial remission: Partial remission is a time period
during which an improvement after a previous episode is maintained and in
which the defining criteria of the disorder are only partially fulfilled.
First episode, currently in full remission: Full remission is a period of time
after a previous episode during which no disorder-specific symptoms are
present.
Multiple episodes, currently in acute episode: Multiple episodes may be
determined after a minimum of two episodes (i.e., after a first episode, a
remission and a minimum of one relapse).
Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission
Multiple episodes, currently in full remission
Continuous: Symptoms fulfilling the diagnostic symptom criteria of the disorder
are remaining for the majority of the illness course, with subthreshold symptom
periods being very brief relative to the overall course.
Unspecified
Specify current severity:
