Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of
psychosis, including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal
psychomotor behavior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may
be rated for its current severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point
scale ranging from 0 (not present) to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-
Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chapter “Assessment
Measures.”)
Note: Diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder can be made without using this
severity specifier.
Diagnostic Features
The diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder is based on the assessment of an uninterrupted period
of illness during which the individual continues to display active or residual symptoms of
psychotic illness. The diagnosis is usually, but not necessarily, made during the period of
psychotic illness. At some time during the period, Criterion A for schizophrenia has to be met.
Criteria B (social dysfunction), C (6-month duration), and F (exclusion of autism spectrum
disorder or other communication disorder of childhood onset) for schizophrenia do not have to
be met. In addition to meeting Criterion A for schizophrenia, there is a major mood episode
(major depressive or manic) (Criterion A for schizoaffective disorder). Because loss of interest or
pleasure is common in schizophrenia, to meet Criterion A for schizoaffective disorder, the major
depressive episode must include pervasive depressed mood (i.e., the presence of markedly
diminished interest or pleasure is not sufficient). Episodes of depression or mania are present for
the majority of the total duration of the illness (i.e., after Criterion A has been met) (Criterion C
for schizoaffective disorder). To separate schizoaffective disorder from a depressive or bipolar
disorder with psychotic features, delusions or hallucinations must be present for at least 2 weeks
in the absence of a major mood episode (depressive or manic) at some point during the lifetime
duration of the illness (Criterion B for schizoaffective disorder). The symptoms must not be
attributable to the effects of a substance or another medical condition (Criterion D for
schizoaffective disorder).
Criterion C for schizoaffective disorder specifies that mood symptoms meeting criteria for a
major mood episode must be present for the majority of the total duration of the active and
residual portion of the illness. Criterion C requires the assessment of mood symptoms for the
entire lifetime course of a psychotic illness. If the mood symptoms are present
123
for only a relatively brief period, the diagnosis is schizophrenia, not schizoaffective disorder.
When deciding whether an individual’s presentation meets Criterion C, the clinician should
review the total duration of psychotic illness (i.e., both active and residual symptoms) and
determine when significant mood symptoms (untreated or in need of treatment with
antidepressant and/or mood-stabilizing medication) accompanied the psychotic symptoms. This
determination requires sufficient historical information and clinical judgment. For example, an
individual with a 4-year history of active and residual symptoms of schizophrenia develops
depressive and manic episodes that, taken together, do not occupy more than 1 year during the 4-
