year history of psychotic illness. This presentation would not meet Criterion C.
In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making critically
important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
Associated Features
Occupational and social functioning is frequently impaired, but this is not a defining criterion (in
contrast to schizophrenia). Restricted social contact and difficulties with self-care are associated
with schizoaffective disorder, but negative symptoms may be less severe and less persistent than
those seen in schizophrenia. Anosognosia (i.e., poor insight) is also common in schizoaffective
disorder, but the deficits in insight may be less severe and pervasive than those in schizophrenia.
Individuals with schizoaffective disorder may be at increased risk for later developing episodes
of major depressive disorder or bipolar disorder if mood symptoms continue following the
remission of symptoms meeting Criterion A for schizophrenia. There may be associated alcohol
and other substance-related disorders.
There are no tests or biological measures that can provide definitive assistance in making the
diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder. Neuropsychological testing typically shows cognitive
deficits in areas such as executive function, verbal memory, and speed of processing, and these
may be less pronounced than in schizophrenia. Schizoaffective disorder is often characterized by
gray matter volume loss on brain imaging, in much the same way that schizophrenia is.
Prevalence
Schizoaffective disorder appears to be about one-third as common as schizophrenia. Lifetime
prevalence of schizoaffective disorder was estimated to be 0.3% in a Finnish sample and is
higher in women than in men when DSM-IV diagnostic criteria were used. This rate would be
expected to be lower because of the more stringent requirement of DSM-5 Criterion C (i.e.,
mood symptoms meeting criteria for a major mood episode must be present for the majority of
the total duration of the active and residual portion of the illness).
Development and Course
The typical age at onset of schizoaffective disorder is early adulthood, although onset can occur
anytime from adolescence to late in life. A significant number of individuals diagnosed with
another psychotic illness initially will receive the diagnosis schizoaffective disorder later when
the pattern of mood episodes has become more apparent, whereas others may be diagnosed with
mood disorders before independent psychotic symptoms are detected.
Conversely, some individuals will have a change in diagnosis from schizoaffective disorder
to a mood disorder or to schizophrenia over time. A change in diagnosis from schizoaffective
disorder to schizophrenia was more common than a change to mood disorder
124
under DSM-IV criteria, and that difference is expected to be more pronounced under DSM-5
as the current Criterion C for schizoaffective disorder has become more stringent, requiring
mood symptoms to be present for the majority of the illness as compared with the DSM-IV
definition, which only required mood symptoms to be present for a “substantial” portion. The
