Genetic and physiological.
prognosis for schizoaffective disorder is somewhat better than the prognosis for schizophrenia
but worse than the prognosis for mood disorders.
Schizoaffective disorder may occur in a variety of temporal patterns. The following is a
typical pattern: An individual may have pronounced auditory hallucinations and persecutory
delusions for 2 months before the onset of a prominent major depressive episode. The psychotic
symptoms and the full major depressive episode are then present for 4 months. Then, the
individual recovers completely from the major depressive episode, but the psychotic symptoms
persist for another month before they too disappear. During this period of illness, the individual’s
symptoms concurrently met criteria for a major depressive episode and Criterion A for
schizophrenia, and during this same period of illness, auditory hallucinations and delusions were
present both before and after the depressive phase. The total period of illness lasted for about 7
months, with psychotic symptoms alone present during the initial 2 months, both depressive and
psychotic symptoms present during the next 4 months, and psychotic symptoms alone present
during the last month. In this instance, the depressive episode was present for a majority of the
total duration of the psychotic disturbance, and thus the presentation qualifies for a diagnosis of
schizoaffective disorder.
The temporal relationship between the mood symptoms and the psychotic symptoms across
the lifespan is variable. Depressive or manic symptoms can occur before the onset of psychosis,
during acute psychotic episodes, during residual periods, and after cessation of psychosis. For
example, an individual might present with prominent mood symptoms during the prodromal
stage of schizophrenia. This pattern is not necessarily indicative of schizoaffective disorder,
since it is the co-occurrence of psychotic and mood symptoms that is diagnostic. For an
individual with symptoms that clearly meet the criteria for schizoaffective disorder but who on
further follow-up only presents with residual psychotic symptoms (such as subthreshold
psychosis and/or prominent negative symptoms), the diagnosis may be changed to schizophrenia,
as the total proportion of psychotic illness compared with mood symptoms becomes more
prominent. Schizoaffective disorder, bipolar type, may be more common in young adults,
whereas schizoaffective disorder, depressive type, may be more common in older adults.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Among individuals with schizophrenia, there may be an increased risk
for schizoaffective disorder in first-degree relatives. The risk for schizoaffective disorder may
also be increased among individuals who have a first-degree relative with bipolar disorder or
schizoaffective disorder itself. The molecular genetic composite signatures known as polygenic
risk scores for schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and major depressive disorder may all be elevated
in schizoaffective disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Cultural and socioeconomic factors must be considered, particularly when the individual and the
clinician do not share the same cultural and economic background. Ideas that appear to be
delusional in one cultural context (e.g., evil eye, causing illness through curses, influences of
spirits) may be commonly held in others. There is also some evidence in the literature that
African American and Hispanic populations whose symptoms meet criteria for schizoaffective
disorder are more likely to be diagnosed with schizophrenia. To mitigate the impact of clinician
