Other mental disorders and medical conditions.
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition.
Schizophrenia, bipolar, and depressive disorders.
bias, care must be taken to ensure a comprehensive evaluation that includes both psychotic and
mood symptoms.
125
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
The lifetime risk of suicide for schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder is 5%, and the
presence of depressive symptoms is correlated with a higher risk for suicide. There is evidence
that suicide rates are higher in North American populations than in European, Eastern European,
South American, and Indian populations of individuals with schizophrenia or schizoaffective
disorder.
Functional Consequences of Schizoaffective Disorder
Schizoaffective disorder is associated with global dysfunction, including in social and
occupational domains, but dysfunction is not a diagnostic criterion (as it is for schizophrenia),
and there is substantial variability between individuals diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
A wide variety of psychiatric and medical conditions
can manifest with psychotic and mood symptoms and must be considered in the differential
diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder. These include delirium; major neurocognitive disorder;
substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder or neurocognitive disorder; bipolar disorders,
with psychotic features; major depressive disorder, with psychotic features; depressive or bipolar
disorders, with catatonic features; schizotypal, schizoid, or paranoid personality disorder; brief
psychotic disorder; schizophreniform disorder; schizophrenia; delusional disorder; and other
specified and unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
Other medical conditions and substance use can
manifest with a combination of psychotic and mood symptoms, and thus psychotic disorder due
to another medical condition needs to be excluded.
Distinguishing 
schizoaffective 
disorder 
from
schizophrenia and from depressive and bipolar disorders with psychotic features is often
difficult. Criterion C is designed to separate schizoaffective disorder from schizophrenia, and
Criterion B is designed to distinguish schizoaffective disorder from a depressive or bipolar
disorder with psychotic features. More specifically, schizoaffective disorder can be distinguished
from a major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features based on the presence of
prominent delusions and/or hallucinations for at least 2 weeks in the absence of a major mood
episode. In contrast, in depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features, the psychotic
features only occur during the mood episode(s). Because the relative proportion of mood to
psychotic symptoms may change over time, the appropriate diagnosis may change from and to
schizoaffective disorder. (For example, a diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder for a severe and
prominent major depressive episode lasting 4 months during the first 6 months of a chronic
psychotic illness would be changed to schizophrenia if active psychotic or prominent residual
symptoms persist over several years without a recurrence of another mood episode.) Achieving
greater clarity about the relative proportion of mood to psychotic symptoms over time and about
