Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of
psychosis, including delusions, hallucinations, abnormal psychomotor behavior,
and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not
present) to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of
Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
Note: Diagnosis of substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder can be
made without using this severity specifier.
Recording Procedures
The name of the substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder begins with the specific
substance (e.g., cocaine, dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing the delusions or
hallucinations. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set, which is
based on the drug class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance use disorder. For
substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for “other (or
unknown) substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an
etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown, the same code should also be
used.
128
When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is
listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance-induced
psychotic disorder, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication, onset
during withdrawal). For example, in the case of delusions occurring during intoxication in a man
with a severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is F14.259 severe cocaine use disorder with
cocaine-induced psychotic disorder, with onset during intoxication. A separate diagnosis of the
comorbid severe cocaine use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced psychotic disorder
occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the
substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F16.959 phencyclidine-
induced psychotic disorder, with onset during intoxication). When more than one substance is
judged to play a significant role in the development of psychotic symptoms, each should be listed
separately (e.g., F12.259 severe cannabis use disorder with cannabis-induced psychotic disorder,
with onset during intoxication; F16.159 mild phencyclidine use disorder with phencyclidine-
induced psychotic disorder, with onset during intoxication).
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder are prominent
delusions and/or hallucinations (Criterion A) that are judged to be due to the physiological
effects of a substance/medication (i.e., a drug of abuse, a medication, or a toxin exposure)
(Criterion B). Hallucinations that the individual realizes are substance/medication-induced are
not included here and instead would be diagnosed as substance intoxication or substance
withdrawal with the accompanying specifier “with perceptual disturbances” (applies to alcohol
