withdrawal; cannabis intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; and stimulant
intoxication).
A substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder is distinguished from an independent
psychotic disorder by considering the onset, course, and other factors. For drugs of abuse, there
must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of substance use,
intoxication, or withdrawal. Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorders arise during or
soon after exposure to or withdrawal from a medication or after substance intoxication or
withdrawal but can persist for weeks, whereas independent psychotic disorders may precede the
onset of substance/medication use or may occur during times of sustained abstinence. Once
initiated, the psychotic symptoms may continue as long as the substance/medication use
continues. Another consideration is the presence of features that are atypical of an independent
psychotic disorder (e.g., atypical age at onset or course). For example, the appearance of
delusions de novo in a male person older than 35 years without a known history of an
independent psychotic disorder should suggest the possibility of a substance/medication-induced
psychotic disorder. Even a prior history of an independent psychotic disorder does not rule out
the possibility of a substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder. In contrast, factors that
suggest that the psychotic symptoms are better accounted for by an independent psychotic
disorder include persistence of psychotic symptoms for a substantial period of time (i.e., a month
or more) after the end of substance intoxication or acute substance withdrawal or after cessation
of medication use; or a history of prior recurrent independent psychotic disorders. Other causes
of psychotic symptoms must be considered even in an individual with substance intoxication or
withdrawal, because substance use problems are not uncommon among individuals with non-
substance/medication-induced psychotic disorders.
In addition to the two symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria (i.e.,
delusions and hallucinations), the assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom
domains is vital for making critically important distinctions between the various schizophrenia
spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
129
Associated Features
Psychotic disorders can occur in association with intoxication with the following classes of
substances: alcohol; cannabis; hallucinogens, including phencyclidine and related substances;
inhalants; sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; stimulants (including cocaine); and other (or
unknown) substances. Psychotic disorders can occur in association with withdrawal from the
following classes of substances: alcohol; sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; and other (or
unknown) substances.
Some of the medications reported to evoke psychotic symptoms include anesthetics and
analgesics, anticholinergic agents, anticonvulsants, antihistamines, antihypertensive and
cardiovascular 
medications, 
antimicrobial 
medications, 
antiparkinsonian 
medications,
chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., cyclosporine, procarbazine), corticosteroids, gastrointestinal
medications, muscle relaxants, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications, other over-the-
counter medications (e.g., phenylephrine, pseudoephedrine), antidepressant medication, and
disulfiram. Toxins reported to induce psychotic symptoms include anticholinesterase,
