organophosphate insecticides, sarin and other nerve gases, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and
volatile substances such as fuel or paint.
Prevalence
Prevalence of substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder in the general population is
unknown. Between 7% and 25% of individuals presenting with a first episode of psychosis in
different settings are reported to have substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder.
Development and Course
The initiation of the psychotic symptoms may vary considerably with the substance. For
example, smoking a high dose of cocaine may produce psychosis within minutes, whereas days
or weeks of high-dose alcohol or sedative use may be required to produce psychosis. Alcohol-
induced psychotic disorder, with hallucinations, usually occurs only after prolonged, heavy
ingestion of alcohol in individuals who have moderate to severe alcohol use disorder, and the
hallucinations are generally auditory in nature.
Psychotic disorders induced by amphetamine-type substances and cocaine share similar
clinical features. Persecutory delusions may rapidly develop shortly after use of amphetamine or
a similarly acting sympathomimetic. The hallucination of bugs or vermin crawling in or under
the skin (formication) can lead to scratching and extensive skin excoriations. Cannabis-induced
psychotic disorder may develop shortly after high-dose cannabis use and usually involves
persecutory delusions, marked anxiety, emotional lability, and depersonalization. The disorder
usually remits within a day but in some cases may persist longer.
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder may at times persist when the offending
agent is removed, such that it may be difficult initially to distinguish it from an independent
psychotic disorder. Agents such as amphetamine-type substances, phencyclidine, and cocaine
have been reported to evoke temporary psychotic states that can sometimes persist for weeks or
longer despite removal of the agent and treatment with neuroleptic medication. In later life,
polypharmacy for medical conditions and exposure to medications for parkinsonism,
cardiovascular disease, and other medical disorders may be associated with a greater likelihood
of psychosis induced by prescription medications as opposed to substances of abuse.
According to data from a Danish registry study that followed cases of substance-induced
psychosis longitudinally over 20 years, roughly one-third (32%) of individuals with substance-
induced psychosis are later diagnosed with a schizophrenia spectrum disorder (26%) or a bipolar
disorder (8%), with the highest rate (44%) for cannabis-induced psychotic disorder.
130
Diagnostic Markers
With substances for which relevant blood levels are available (e.g., blood alcohol level, other
quantifiable blood levels such as digoxin), the presence of a level consistent with toxicity may
increase diagnostic certainty.
Functional Consequences of Substance/Medication-Induced Psychotic
Disorder
