Substance intoxication or substance withdrawal.
Independent psychotic disorder.
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition.
Other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder is typically severely disabling and
consequently is observed most frequently in emergency departments, as individuals are often
brought to the acute-care setting when it occurs. However, the disability is typically self-limited
and resolves upon removal of the offending agent.
Differential Diagnosis
Individuals intoxicated with stimulants, cannabis,
the opioid meperidine, or phencyclidine, or those withdrawing from alcohol or sedatives, may
experience altered perceptions that they recognize as drug effects. If reality testing for these
experiences remains intact (i.e., the individual recognizes that the perception is substance
induced and neither believes in nor acts on it), the diagnosis is not substance/medication-induced
psychotic disorder. Instead, substance intoxication or substance withdrawal, with perceptual
disturbances, is diagnosed (e.g., cocaine intoxication, with perceptual disturbances). “Flashback”
hallucinations that can occur long after the use of hallucinogens has stopped are diagnosed as
hallucinogen persisting perception disorder. If substance/medication-induced psychotic
symptoms occur exclusively during the course of a delirium, as in severe forms of alcohol
withdrawal, the psychotic symptoms are considered to be an associated feature of the delirium
and are not diagnosed separately. Delusions in the context of a major or mild neurocognitive
disorder would be diagnosed as major or mild neurocognitive disorder, with behavioral
disturbance.
A 
substance/medication-induced 
psychotic 
disorder 
is
distinguished from an independent psychotic disorder, such as schizophrenia, schizoaffective
disorder, delusional disorder, brief psychotic disorder, other specified schizophrenia spectrum
and other psychotic disorder, or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
disorder, by the fact that a substance is judged to be etiologically related to the symptoms.
A 
substance/medication-induced 
psychotic
disorder due to a prescribed treatment for a mental disorder or medical condition must have its
onset while the individual is receiving the medication (or during withdrawal, if there is a
withdrawal syndrome associated with the medication). Because individuals with medical
conditions often take medications for those conditions, the clinician must consider the possibility
that the psychotic symptoms are caused by the physiological consequences of the medical
condition itself rather than the medication, in which case psychotic disorder due to another
medical condition is diagnosed. The history often provides the primary basis for such a
judgment. At times, a change in the treatment for the medical condition (e.g., medication
substitution or discontinuation) may be needed to determine empirically for that individual
whether the medication is the causative agent. If the clinician has ascertained that the disturbance
is attributable to both a medical condition and substance/medication use, both diagnoses (i.e.,
psychotic disorder due to another medical condition and substance/medication-induced psychotic
disorder) may be given.
The 
psychotic
symptoms included in the diagnosis of substance/medication-induced psy-chotic disorder are
limited to either delusions or hallucinations. Individuals with other
131
