substance-induced psychotic symptoms (e.g., disorganized or catatonic behavior; disorganized
speech; incoherence or irrational content) should be classified in the category other specified or
unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.
Psychotic Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Prominent hallucinations or delusions.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another
medical condition.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder.
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify whether:
Code based on predominant symptom:
F06.2 With delusions: If delusions are the predominant symptom.
F06.0 With hallucinations: If hallucinations are the predominant symptom.
Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the
mental disorder (e.g., F06.2 psychotic disorder due to malignant lung neoplasm, with
delusions). The other medical condition should be coded and listed separately
immediately before the psychotic disorder due to the medical condition (e.g., C34.90
malignant lung neoplasm; F06.2 psychotic disorder due to malignant lung neoplasm,
with delusions).
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of
psychosis, including delusions, hallucinations, abnormal psychomotor behavior,
and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not
present) to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of
Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
Note: Diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition can be
made without using this severity specifier.
Specifiers
In addition to the symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the assessment of
cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making critically important
distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
