Diagnostic Features
The essential features of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition are prominent
delusions or hallucinations that are judged to be attributable to the physiological effects of
another medical condition and are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., the
symptoms are not a psychologically mediated response to a severe medical condition, in which
case a diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder, with marked stressor, would be appropriate).
132
Hallucinations can occur in any sensory modality (i.e., visual, olfactory, gustatory, tactile, or
auditory), but certain etiological factors are likely to evoke specific hallucinatory phenomena.
Olfactory hallucinations are suggestive of temporal lobe epilepsy, for example. Hallucinations
may vary from simple and unformed to highly complex and organized, depending on etiological
and environmental factors. Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition is generally not
diagnosed if the individual maintains reality testing for the hallucinations and appreciates that
they result from the medical condition. Delusions may have a variety of themes, including
somatic, grandiose, religious, and, most commonly, persecutory. On the whole, however,
associations between delusions and particular medical conditions appear to be less specific than
is the case for hallucinations.
Although there are no infallible guidelines to determine whether the psychotic disturbance is
etiologically attributable to another medical condition, three considerations can provide some
guidance: biological plausibility, temporality, and typicality. First, the presence of a medical
condition that has the potential to cause psychotic symptoms through a putative physiological
mechanism (e.g., severe, generalized infection; porphyria; lupus; temporal lobe epilepsy) must
be identified (biological plausibility). The second consideration is whether there is a temporal
association between the onset, exacerbation, or remission of the medical condition and that of the
psychotic disturbance (temporality). The third consideration in favor of a medical etiology of the
psychotic symptoms is the presence of features that would be atypical for an independent
psychotic disorder (e.g., atypical age at onset, presence of visual or olfactory hallucinations)
(typicality). Finally, causes of psychotic symptoms other than the physiological effects of a
medical condition need to be considered and ruled out (e.g., substance/medication-induced
psychotic disorder, psychotic symptoms occurring as side effects of the treatment of the medical
condition).
The temporal association of the onset or exacerbation of the medical condition offers the
greatest diagnostic certainty that the delusions or hallucinations are attributable to a medical
condition. Additional factors may include concomitant treatments for the underlying medical
condition that confer a risk for psychosis independently, such as steroid treatment for
autoimmune disorders.
The diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition depends on the clinical
condition of each individual, and the diagnostic tests will vary according to that condition. A
wide variety of medical conditions may cause psychotic symptoms. These include neurological
conditions (e.g., neoplasms, cerebrovascular disease, Huntington’s disease, Parkinson’s disease,
multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, auditory or visual nerve injury or impairment, deafness, migraine,
central nervous system infections), endocrine conditions (e.g., hyper- and hypothyroidism,
