hyper- and hypoparathyroidism, hyper- and hypoadrenocorticism), metabolic conditions (e.g.,
hypoxia, hypercarbia, hypoglycemia), vitamin B12 deficiency, fluid or electrolyte imbalances,
hepatic or renal diseases, and autoimmune disorders with central nervous system involvement
(e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus, N-methyl-D-aspartate [NMDA] receptor autoimmune
encephalitis). The associated physical examination findings, laboratory findings, and patterns of
prevalence or onset reflect the etiological medical condition.
Prevalence
Prevalence rates for psychotic disorder due to another medical condition are difficult to estimate
given the wide variety of underlying medical etiologies. Lifetime prevalence has been estimated
to range from 0.21% to 0.54% in studies in Sweden and Finland. When the prevalence findings
are stratified by age group, individuals older than 65 years have a significantly greater prevalence
of 0.74% compared with those in younger age groups in Finland. Rates of psychosis also vary
according to the underlying medical condition; conditions most commonly associated with
psychosis include untreated endocrine and metabolic disorders, autoimmune disorders (e.g.,
systemic lupus erythematosus, NMDA receptor autoimmune encephalitis), or temporal lobe
epilepsy. Psychosis attributable to epilepsy
133
has been further differentiated into ictal, postictal, and interictal psychosis. The most common of
these is postictal psychosis, observed in 2%–7.8% of individuals with epilepsy. Among older
individuals, there may be a higher prevalence of the disorder in women, although additional sex-
or gender-related features are not clear and vary considerably with the sex and gender
distributions of the underlying medical conditions. An estimated 60% of older individuals with
new-onset psychosis have a medical etiology for their psychotic symptoms.
Development and Course
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition may be a single transient state or it may be
recurrent, cycling with exacerbations and remissions of the underlying medical condition.
Although treatment of the underlying medical condition often results in a resolution of the
psychosis, this is not always the case, and psychotic symptoms may persist long after the medical
event (e.g., psychotic disorder due to focal brain injury). In the context of chronic conditions
such as multiple sclerosis or chronic interictal psychosis of epilepsy, the psychosis may assume a
long-term course.
The expression of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition does not differ
substantially in phenomenology depending on age at occurrence. However, older age groups
have a higher prevalence of the disorder, which is most likely due to the increasing medical
burden associated with advanced age and the cumulative effects of deleterious exposures and
age-related processes (e.g., atherosclerosis). The nature of the underlying medical conditions is
likely to change across the lifespan, with younger age groups more affected by epilepsy, head
trauma, autoimmune, and neoplastic diseases of early to midlife, and older age groups more
affected by a neurodegenerative disease (e.g., Alzheimer’s), stroke disease, anoxic events, and
multiple system comorbidities. Underlying factors with increasing age, such as preexisting
cognitive impairment as well as vision and hearing impairments, may incur a greater risk for
