Course modifiers.
Delirium and major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder.
Psychotic disorder.
psychosis, possibly by serving to lower the threshold for experiencing psychosis.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Identification and treatment of the underlying medical condition has the
greatest impact on course, although preexisting central nervous system injury may confer a
worse course outcome (e.g., head trauma, cerebrovascular disease).
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Suicide risk in the context of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition is not clearly
delineated, although certain conditions such as epilepsy and multiple sclerosis are associated
with increased rates of suicide, which may be further increased in the presence of psychosis.
Functional Consequences of Psychotic Disorder Due to Another
Medical Condition
Functional disability is typically severe in the context of psychotic disorder due to another
medical condition but will vary considerably by the type of condition and likely improve with
successful resolution of the condition.
Differential Diagnosis
Hallucinations and delusions commonly occur in
the context of a delirium; a separate diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to
134
another medical condition is not given if the delusions and/or hallucinations occur exclusively
during the course of a delirium. On the other hand, a diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to
another medical condition may be given in addition to a diagnosis of major or mild
neurocognitive disorder if the delusions or hallucinations are judged to be a physiological
consequence of the pathological process causing the neurocognitive disorder (e.g., psychotic
disorder due to Lewy body disease, with delusions).
If there is evidence of recent or prolonged
substance use (including medications with psychoactive effects), withdrawal from a substance or
medication that can cause psychotic symptoms on withdrawal, or exposure to a toxin (e.g., LSD
[lysergic acid diethylamide] intoxication, alcohol withdrawal), a substance/medication-induced
psychotic disorder should be considered. Symptoms that occur during or shortly after (i.e., within
4 weeks) of substance intoxication or withdrawal or after medication use may be especially
indicative of a substance-induced psychotic disorder, depending on the character, duration, or
amount of the substance used. If the clinician has ascertained that the disturbance is due to both a
medical condition and substance use, both diagnoses (i.e., psychotic disorder due to another
medical condition and substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder) can be given.
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition must be distinguished
from a psychotic disorder that is not due to another medical condition (e.g., schizophrenia,
delusional disorder, schizoaffective disorder) or a major depressive or bipolar disorder, with
psychotic features. In psychotic disorders and in depressive or bipolar disorders, with psychotic
