features, no specific and direct causative physiological mechanisms associated with a medical
condition can be demonstrated. Late age at onset and the absence of a personal or family history
of schizophrenia or delusional disorder suggest the need for a thorough assessment to rule out the
diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition. Auditory hallucinations that
involve voices speaking complex sentences are more characteristic of schizophrenia than of
psychotic disorder due to a medical condition. While certain symptoms suggest a medical or
toxic etiology (e.g., visual or olfactory hallucinations, dreamlike quality of delusions [individual
as uninvolved observer]), there are no pathognomonic signs or symptoms that unequivocally
point clinicians either way. Visual hallucinations are not uncommon in schizophrenia or bipolar
disorder, and olfactory hallucinations (e.g., unpleasant smells) are also consistent with a
diagnosis of schizophrenia. Thus, clinicians should not give undue weight to any one particular
hallucination alone when deciding between a psychiatric and a medical cause for
psychopathology.
Comorbidity
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition in individuals older than 80 years is
associated with concurrent major neurocognitive disorder (dementia). Alzheimer’s disease is
commonly accompanied by psychosis, and psychosis is a defining feature in Lewy body disease.
Catatonia
Catatonia can occur in the context of several disorders, including neurodevelopmental, psychotic,
bipolar, and depressive disorders, and other medical conditions (e.g., cerebral folate deficiency,
rare autoimmune and paraneoplastic disorders). The manual does not treat catatonia as an
independent class but recognizes a) catatonia associated with another
135
mental disorder (i.e., a neurodevelopmental, psychotic disorder, a bipolar disorder, a depressive
disorder, or other mental disorder), b) catatonic disorder due to another medical condition, and c)
unspecified catatonia.
Catatonia is defined by the presence of 3 or more of 12 psychomotor features in the
diagnostic criteria for catatonia associated with another mental disorder and catatonic disorder
due to another medical condition. The essential feature of catatonia is a marked psychomotor
disturbance that may involve decreased motor activity, decreased engagement during interview
or physical examination, or excessive and peculiar motor activity. The clinical presentation of
catatonia can be puzzling, as the psychomotor disturbance may range from marked
unresponsiveness to marked agitation. Motoric immobility may be severe (stupor) or moderate
(catalepsy and waxy flexibility). Similarly, decreased engagement may be severe (mutism) or
moderate (negativism). Excessive and peculiar motor behaviors can be complex (e.g.,
stereotypy) or simple (agitation) and may include echolalia and echopraxia. In extreme cases, the
same individual may wax and wane between decreased and excessive motor activity. The
seemingly opposing clinical features, variable manifestations of the diagnosis, and overemphasis
in teaching on rare, severe signs such as waxy flexibility contribute to a lack of awareness and
