decreased recognition of catatonia. During severe stages of catatonia, the individual may need
careful supervision to avoid self-harm or harming others. There are potential risks from
malnutrition, exhaustion, thromboembolism, pressure ulcers, muscle contractions, hyperpyrexia
and self-inflicted injury.
Catatonia Associated With Another Mental Disorder
(Catatonia Specifier)
F06.1
A. The clinical picture is dominated by three (or more) of the following symptoms:
1. Stupor (i.e., no psychomotor activity; not actively relating to environment).
2. Catalepsy (i.e., passive induction of a posture held against gravity).
3. Waxy flexibility (i.e., slight, even resistance to positioning by examiner).
4. Mutism (i.e., no, or very little, verbal response [exclude if known aphasia]).
5. Negativism (i.e., opposition or no response to instructions or external stimuli).
6. Posturing (i.e., spontaneous and active maintenance of a posture against
gravity).
7. Mannerism (i.e., odd, circumstantial caricature of normal actions).
8. Stereotypy 
(i.e., 
repetitive, 
abnormally 
frequent, 
non-goal-directed
movements).
9. Agitation, not influenced by external stimuli.
10. Grimacing.
11. Echolalia (i.e., mimicking another’s speech).
12. Echopraxia (i.e., mimicking another’s movements).
Coding note: Indicate the name of the associated mental disorder when recording
the name of the condition (i.e., F06.1 catatonia associated with major depressive
disorder). Code first the associated mental disorder (e.g., neurodevelopmental
disorder, brief psychotic disorder, schizophreniform disorder, schizophrenia,
schizoaffective disorder, bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder, or other mental
disorder) (e.g., F25.1 schizoaffective disorder, depressive type; F06.1 catatonia
associated with schizoaffective disorder).
136
Diagnostic Features
Catatonia associated with another mental disorder (catatonia specifier) may be used when criteria
are met for catatonia during the course of a neurodevelopmental, psychotic, bipolar, depressive,
or other mental disorder. The catatonia specifier is appropriate when the clinical picture is
characterized by marked psychomotor disturbance and involves at least three of the 12 diagnostic
