F06.1
features listed in Criterion A. Catatonia is typically diagnosed in an inpatient setting and occurs
in up to 35% of individuals with schizophrenia, but the majority of catatonia cases involve
individuals with depressive or bipolar disorders. Meta-analysis of clinical samples indicated that
approximately 9% of patients had catatonia. Before the catatonia specifier is used in
neurodevelopmental, psychotic, bipolar, depressive, or other mental disorders, a wide variety of
other medical conditions need to be ruled out; these conditions include, but are not limited to,
medical conditions due to infectious, metabolic, or neurological conditions (see “Catatonic
Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition”). Catatonia can also be a side effect of a
medication (see the chapter “Medication-Induced Movement Disorders and Other Adverse
Effects of Medication”). Because of the seriousness of the complications, particular attention
should be paid to the possibility that the catatonia is attributable to G21.0 neuroleptic malignant
syndrome.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The association between catatonia and mood disorders has been found in a wide range of cultural
contexts.
Catatonic Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria
A. The clinical picture is dominated by three (or more) of the following symptoms:
1. Stupor (i.e., no psychomotor activity; not actively relating to environment).
2. Catalepsy (i.e., passive induction of a posture held against gravity).
3. Waxy flexibility (i.e., slight, even resistance to positioning by examiner).
4. Mutism (i.e., no, or very little, verbal response [Note: not applicable if there is
an established aphasia]).
5. Negativism (i.e., opposition or no response to instructions or external stimuli).
6. Posturing (i.e., spontaneous and active maintenance of a posture against
gravity).
7. Mannerism (i.e., odd, circumstantial caricature of normal actions).
8. Stereotypy 
(i.e., 
repetitive, 
abnormally 
frequent, 
non-goal-directed
movements).
9. Agitation, not influenced by external stimuli.
10. Grimacing.
11. Echolalia (i.e., mimicking another’s speech).
12. Echopraxia (i.e., mimicking another’s movements).
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another
medical condition.
