C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., a manic
episode).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
137
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Coding note: Include the name of the medical condition in the name of the mental
disorder (e.g., F06.1 catatonic disorder due to hepatic encephalopathy). The other
medical condition should be coded and listed separately immediately before the
catatonic 
disorder 
due 
to 
the 
medical 
condition 
(e.g., 
K72.90 
hepatic
encephalopathy; F06.1 catatonic disorder due to hepatic encephalopathy).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of catatonic disorder due to another medical condition is the presence of
catatonia that is judged to be attributed to the physiological effects of another medical condition.
Catatonia can be diagnosed by the presence of at least 3 of the 12 clinical features in Criterion A.
There must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the
catatonia is attributable to another medical condition (Criterion B). The diagnosis is not given if
the catatonia is better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., manic episode) (Criterion C) or
if it occurs exclusively during the course of a delirium (Criterion D).
Associated Features
A variety of medical conditions may cause catatonia, especially neurological conditions (e.g.,
neoplasms, head trauma, cerebrovascular disease, encephalitis) and metabolic conditions (e.g.,
hypercalcemia, hepatic encephalopathy, homocystinuria, diabetic ketoacidosis). The associated
physical examination findings, laboratory findings, and patterns of prevalence and onset reflect
those of the etiological medical condition.
Differential Diagnosis
A separate diagnosis of catatonic disorder due to another medical condition is not given if the
catatonia occurs exclusively during the course of a delirium or neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
However, even though a separate diagnosis of catatonia cannot be made, research suggests that
catatonia symptoms occur in a significant proportion of delirium cases. If the individual is
currently taking neuroleptic medication, consideration should be given to medication-induced
movement disorders (e.g., abnormal positioning may be due to neuroleptic-induced acute
dystonia) or neuroleptic malignant syndrome (e.g., catatonic-like features may be present, along
with associated vital sign and/or laboratory abnormalities). Catatonic symptoms may be present
in any of the following five psychotic disorders: brief psychotic disorder, schizophreniform
disorder, schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, and substance/medication-induced psychotic
disorder. It may also be present in some of the neurodevelopmental disorders, in all of the bipolar
and depressive disorders, and in other mental disorders.
