Unspecified Catatonia
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of catatonia
cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning but either the nature of the underlying mental disorder
or other medical condition is unclear, full criteria for catatonia are not met, or there is
insufficient information to make a more specific diagnosis (e.g., in emergency room
settings).
 
Coding note: Code first R29.818 other symptoms involving nervous and
musculoskeletal systems, followed by F06.1 unspecified catatonia.
138
Other Specified Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other
Psychotic Disorder
F28
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a
schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder that cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning
predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the
schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders diagnostic class. The other
specified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder category is used in
situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate the specific reason that the
presentation does not meet the criteria for any specific schizophrenia spectrum and
other psychotic disorder. This is done by recording “other specified schizophrenia
spectrum and other psychotic disorder” followed by the specific reason (e.g.,
“persistent auditory hallucinations”).
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified”
designation include the following:
1. Persistent auditory hallucinations occurring in the absence of any other
features.
2. Delusions with significant overlapping mood episodes: This includes
persistent delusions with periods of overlapping mood episodes that are present
for a substantial portion of the delusional disturbance (such that the criterion
stipulating only brief mood disturbance in delusional disorder is not met).
3. Attenuated psychosis syndrome: This syndrome is characterized by
psychotic-like symptoms that are below a threshold for full psychosis (e.g., the
symptoms are less severe and more transient, and insight is relatively
maintained).
