Bipolar and Related Disorders
Bipolar and related disorders are found between the chapters on schizophrenia
spectrum and other psychotic disorders and depressive disorders in DSM-5-TR in recognition of
their place as a bridge between those two diagnostic classes in terms of symptomatology, family
history, and genetics. The diagnoses included in this chapter are bipolar I disorder, bipolar II
disorder, cyclothymic disorder, substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder,
bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition, other specified bipolar and related
disorder, and unspecified bipolar and related disorder.
The bipolar I disorder criteria represent the modern understanding of the classic manic-
depressive disorder or affective psychosis described in the nineteenth century, differing from that
classic description only to the extent that neither psychosis nor the lifetime experience of a major
depressive episode is a requirement. However, the vast majority of individuals whose symptoms
meet the criteria for a fully syndromal manic episode also experience major depressive episodes
during the course of their lives.
Bipolar II disorder, requiring the lifetime experience of at least one major depressive episode
and at least one hypomanic episode (but no history of mania), is no longer thought to be a less
severe condition than bipolar I disorder, largely because of the burden of depression in bipolar II
disorder and because the instability of mood experienced by individuals with bipolar II disorder
is often accompanied by serious impairment in work and social functioning.
The diagnosis of cyclothymic disorder is given to adults who experience at least 2 years (for
children, a full year) of both hypomanic and depressive periods without ever fulfilling the criteria
for an episode of mania, hypomania, or major depression.
A large number of substances of abuse, some prescribed medications, and several medical
conditions can be associated with manic-like phenomena. This fact is recognized in the
diagnoses of substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder and bipolar and related
disorder due to another medical condition.
The recognition that there are individuals who experience bipolar-like phenomena with
symptoms that do not meet the criteria for bipolar I, bipolar II, or cyclothymic disorder is
reflected in the availability of the other specified bipolar and related disorder category. Specific
criteria for a disorder involving short-duration hypomania are provided in Section III in the hope
of encouraging further study of this presentation of bipolar disorder symptomatology and its
course.
Bipolar I Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
