For a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder, it is necessary to meet the following criteria for
a manic episode. The manic episode may have been preceded by and may be
followed by hypomanic or major depressive episodes.
140
Manic Episode
A. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable
mood and abnormally and persistently increased activity or energy, lasting at
least 1 week and present most of the day, nearly every day (or any duration if
hospitalization is necessary).
B. During the period of mood disturbance and increased energy or activity, three (or
more) of the following symptoms (four if the mood is only irritable) are present to
a significant degree and represent a noticeable change from usual behavior:
1. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
2. Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hours of sleep).
3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
5. Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to unimportant or irrelevant
external stimuli), as reported or observed.
6. Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or
sexually) or psychomotor agitation (i.e., purposeless non-goal-directed
activity).
7. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful
consequences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual
indiscretions, or foolish business investments).
C. The mood disturbance is sufficiently severe to cause marked impairment in
social or occupational functioning or to necessitate hospitalization to prevent
harm to self or others, or there are psychotic features.
D. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
drug of abuse, a medication, other treatment) or another medical condition.
Note: A full manic episode that emerges during antidepressant treatment (e.g.,
medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully syndromal level
beyond the physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a
manic episode and, therefore, a bipolar I diagnosis.
Note: Criteria A–D constitute a manic episode. At least one lifetime manic episode is
required for the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder.
Hypomanic Episode
A. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable
mood and abnormally and persistently increased activity or energy, lasting at
least 4 consecutive days and present most of the day, nearly every day.
