Specify if:
With anxious distress (pp. 169–170)
With mixed features (pp. 170–171)
With rapid cycling (p. 171)
With melancholic features (pp. 171–172)
With atypical features (pp. 172–173)
With mood-congruent psychotic features (p. 173; applies to manic episode
and/or major depressive episode)
With mood-incongruent psychotic features (p. 173; applies to manic episode
and/or major depressive episode)
With catatonia (p. 173). Coding note: Use additional code F06.1.
With peripartum onset (pp. 173–174)
With seasonal pattern (pp. 174–175)
Diagnostic Features
Bipolar I disorder is characterized by a clinical course of recurring mood episodes (manic,
depressive, and hypomanic), but the occurrence of at least one manic episode is necessary for the
diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. The essential feature of a manic episode is a distinct period
during which there is an abnormally, persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and
persistently increased activity or energy that is present for most of the day, nearly every day, for
a period of at least 1 week (or any duration if hospitalization is necessary), accompanied by at
least three additional symptoms from Criterion B. If the mood is irritable rather than elevated or
expansive, at least four Criterion B symptoms must be present.
Mood in a manic episode is often described as euphoric, excessively cheerful, high, or
“feeling on top of the world.” In some cases, the mood is of such a highly infectious quality that
it is easily recognized as excessive and may be characterized by unlimited and
144
haphazard enthusiasm for interpersonal, sexual, or occupational interactions. For example,
the individual may spontaneously start extensive conversations with strangers in public. Often
the predominant mood is irritable rather than elevated, particularly when the individual’s wishes
are denied or if the individual has been using substances. Rapid shifts in mood over brief periods
of time may occur and are referred to as lability (i.e., the alternation among euphoria, dysphoria,
and irritability). In children, happiness, silliness, and “goofiness” are normal in many social
contexts; however, if these symptoms are recurrent, inappropriate to the context, and beyond
what is expected for the developmental level of the child, they may meet the Criterion A mood
requirement of abnormally elevated mood. For the happiness or silliness of a child to meet
Criterion A, it must be distinctly increased from the child’s baseline and accompanied by
persistently increased activity or energy levels that to those who know the child well are clearly
unusual for that child. For a child’s symptoms to meet criteria for a manic episode, the symptoms
