must also meet Criterion B for mania and must also represent a change from the child’s usual
baseline.
During the manic episode, the individual may engage in multiple overlapping new projects.
The projects are often initiated with little knowledge of the topic, and nothing seems out of the
individual’s reach. The increased activity or energy levels may manifest at unusual hours of the
day, such as during the individual’s normal sleep phase.
Inflated self-esteem is typically present, ranging from uncritical self-confidence to marked
grandiosity, and may reach delusional proportions (Criterion B1). Despite lack of any particular
experience or talent, the individual may embark on complex tasks such as writing a novel or
seeking publicity for some impractical invention. Grandiose delusions (e.g., of having a special
relationship to a famous person) are common. In children, overestimation of abilities and belief
that, for example, they are the best at a sport or the smartest in the class is normal; however,
when such beliefs are present despite clear evidence to the contrary or the child attempts feats
that are clearly dangerous and, most important, represent a change from the child’s normal
behavior, the grandiosity criterion should be considered satisfied.
One of the most common features is a decreased need for sleep (Criterion B2), which is
distinct from insomnia (during which the individual wants to sleep or feels the need to sleep but
is unable to). The individual may sleep little, if at all, or may awaken several hours earlier than
usual, feeling rested and full of energy. When the sleep disturbance is severe, the individual may
go for days without sleep, yet not feel tired. Often decreased need for sleep heralds the onset of a
manic episode.
Speech can be rapid, pressured, loud, and difficult to interrupt (Criterion B3). Individuals
may talk continuously and without regard for others’ wishes to communicate, often in an
intrusive manner or without concern for the relevance of what is said. Speech is sometimes
characterized by jokes, puns, amusing irrelevancies, and theatricality, with dramatic mannerisms,
singing, and excessive gesturing. Loudness and forcefulness of speech often become more
important than what is conveyed. If the individual’s mood is more irritable than expansive,
speech may be marked by complaints, hostile comments, or angry tirades, particularly if attempts
are made to interrupt the individual. Both Criterion A and Criterion B symptoms may be
accompanied by symptoms of the opposite (i.e., depressive) pole (see “with mixed features”
specifier, pp. 170–171).
Often the individual’s thoughts race at a rate faster than can be expressed through speech
(Criterion B4). Frequently there is flight of ideas evidenced by a nearly continuous flow of
accelerated speech, with abrupt shifts from one topic to another. When flight of ideas is severe,
speech may become disorganized, incoherent, and particularly distressing to the individual.
Sometimes thoughts are experienced as so crowded that it is very difficult to speak.
Distractibility (Criterion B5) is evidenced by an inability to censor immaterial external
stimuli (e.g., the interviewer’s attire, background noises or conversations, furnishings in the
room) and often prevents individuals experiencing mania from holding a rational conversation or
attending to instructions.
145
The increase in goal-directed activity (Criterion B6) often consists of excessive planning and
participation in multiple activities, including sexual, occupational, political, or religious
