activities. Increased sexual drive, fantasies, and behavior are often present. Individuals in a
manic episode usually show increased sociability (e.g., renewing old acquaintances or calling or
contacting friends or even strangers), without regard to the intrusive, domineering, and
demanding nature of these interactions. They often also display psychomotor agitation or
restlessness (i.e., purposeless activity) by pacing or by holding multiple conversations
simultaneously. Some individuals write excessive letters, e-mails, text messages, and so forth, on
many different topics to friends, public figures, or the media.
The increased activity criterion can be difficult to ascertain in children; however, when the
child takes on many tasks simultaneously, starts devising elaborate and unrealistic plans for
projects, develops previously absent and developmentally inappropriate sexual preoccupations
(not accounted for by sexual abuse or exposure to sexually explicit material), then Criterion B
might be met based on clinical judgment. It is essential to determine whether the behavior
represents a change from the child’s baseline behavior; occurs most of the day, nearly every day
for the requisite time period; and occurs in temporal association with other symptoms of mania.
The expansive mood, excessive optimism, grandiosity, and poor judgment often lead to
reckless involvement in activities such as spending sprees, giving away possessions, reckless
driving, foolish business investments, and sexual indiscretions that are unusual for the individual,
even though these activities are likely to have catastrophic consequences (Criterion B7). The
individual may purchase many unneeded items without the money to pay for them and, in some
cases, give them away. Sexual indiscretions may include infidelity or indiscriminate sexual
encounters with strangers, often disregarding the risk of sexually transmitted diseases or
interpersonal consequences.
The manic episode must result in marked impairment in social or occupational functioning
(e.g., financial losses, loss of employment, school failure, divorce) or require hospitalization to
prevent harm to self or others (e.g., physical exhaustion or hyperthermia from manic excitement,
self-injurious behavior). By definition, the presence of psychotic features during a manic episode
also satisfies Criterion C.
Manic symptoms or syndromes that are attributable to the direct physiological effects of a
drug of abuse (e.g., in the context of cocaine or amphetamine intoxication), the side effects of
medications or treatments (e.g., steroids, L-dopa, antidepressants, stimulants), or another medical
condition do not count toward the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. However, a fully syndromal
manic episode that arises during treatment (e.g., with medications, electroconvulsive therapy,
light therapy) and persists beyond the physiological effect of the inducing agent (e.g., after a
medication is fully out of the individual’s system or the effects of electroconvulsive therapy
would be expected to have dissipated completely) is sufficient evidence for a manic episode that
is considered due to bipolar I disorder (Criterion D). Caution is indicated so that one or two
symptoms (particularly increased irritability, edginess, or agitation following antidepressant use)
are not taken as sufficient for diagnosis of a manic or hypomanic episode, nor necessarily an
indication of a bipolar disorder diathesis. Although not essential to a diagnosis of bipolar I
disorder, hypomanic or depressive episodes often precede or follow a manic episode. Full
descriptions of the diagnostic features of a hypomanic episode may be found within the text for
bipolar II disorder, and the features of a major depressive episode are described within the text
for major depressive disorder.
