Associated Features
During a manic episode, individuals often do not perceive that they are ill or in need of treatment
and vehemently resist efforts to be treated. Individuals may change their dress, makeup, or
personal appearance to a more sexually suggestive or flamboyant style. Some perceive a sharper
sense of smell, hearing, or vision. Gambling and antisocial behaviors
146
may accompany the manic episode. Mood may shift very rapidly to anger or depression; some
individuals may become hostile and physically threatening to others and, when delusional,
become physically assaultive or suicidal. Serious consequences of a manic episode (e.g.,
involuntary hospitalization, difficulties with the law, serious financial difficulties) often result
from poor judgment, loss of insight, and hyperactivity. Depressive symptoms occur in some 35%
of manic episodes (see “with mixed features” specifier, p. 170), and mixed features are
associated with poorer outcome and increased suicide attempts. Bipolar I disorder is also
associated with significant decrements in quality of life and well-being.
Trait-like features associated with the diagnosis include hyperthymic, depressive,
cyclothymic, anxious, and irritable temperaments, sleep and circadian rhythm disturbances,
reward sensitivity, and creativity. Having a first-degree relative with bipolar disorder increases
the risk of diagnosis approximately 10-fold.
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence of DSM-5 bipolar I disorder in a nationally representative U.S. adult
sample was 1.5% and did not differ between men (1.6%) and women (1.5%). Compared with
non-Hispanic Whites, prevalence of bipolar I disorder appears to be higher among Native
Americans and lower among African Americans, Hispanics, and Asians/Pacific Islanders.
Twelve-month prevalence of DSM-IV bipolar I disorder across 11 countries ranged from 0.0% to
0.6% and was greater in high-income countries than in low- and middle-income countries, except
in Japan, where prevalence was low (0.01%). The lifetime prevalence ratio in men to women is
approximately 1.1:1.
Development and Course
The peak age at onset of bipolar I disorder across studies is between 20 and 30 years, but onset
occurs throughout the life cycle. In the United States, mean age at onset of DSM-5 bipolar I
disorder is 22 years and slightly younger for women (21.5 years) than for men (23.0 years). In a
comparison of six international sites, median age at onset of DSM-IV-TR bipolar I disorder was
24.3 years. Special considerations are necessary to apply the diagnosis in children. Because
children of the same chronological age may be at different developmental stages, it is difficult to
define with precision what is “normal” or “expected” at any given point. Therefore, each child
should be judged according to his or her own baseline in determining whether a particular
behavior is “normal” or evidence of a manic episode. Although age at first onset may occur in
the 60s or 70s, onset of manic symptoms (e.g., sexual or social disinhibition) in late mid-life or
late-life should prompt consideration of medical conditions (e.g., frontotemporal neurocognitive
disorder) and of substance ingestion or withdrawal.
