Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
More than 90% of individuals who have a single manic episode go on to have recurrent mood
episodes. Approximately 60% of manic episodes occur immediately before a major depressive
episode. Individuals with bipolar I disorder who have multiple (four or more) mood episodes
(major depressive, manic, or hypomanic) occurring in the prior 12 months receive the specifier
“with rapid cycling,” a common variant associated with poorer outcomes. About half of
individuals diagnosed with bipolar disorder exhibit a predominant polarity (relapse tending to be
either depressive or manic), with one international study of bipolar I disorder finding 31.3% with
predominant mania, 21.4% with predominant depression, and 47.3% without polarity
predominance.
The course of bipolar I disorder is highly heterogeneous. Some patterns have been noted
across episodes (e.g., a manic episode with psychotic features may be associated with psychotic
features in subsequent manic episodes). Polarity of first episode tends to be associated with
predominant polarity of future episodes and clinical features (e.g., depressive onset is associated
with greater density of depressive episodes and suicidal behavior). The
147
presence of mixed features in a manic episode is associated with a poorer prognosis, poorer
lithium response, and suicidal behavior.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Childhood 
adversity 
(including 
early 
emotional 
trauma, 
parental
psychopathology, and family conflict) is a known risk factor for bipolar disorder and appears to
predispose to early onset of bipolar disorder. Childhood adversity is also associated with poorer
prognosis and a worse clinical picture that may include medical or psychiatric comorbidities,
suicide, and associated psychotic features. More proximally, recent life stress and other negative
life events increase depressive relapse risk in individuals diagnosed with bipolar disorder,
whereas manic relapse appears to be specifically linked to goal-attainment life events (e.g.,
getting married, completing a degree). Cannabis and other substance use is associated with
exacerbation of manic symptoms among individuals diagnosed with bipolar disorder, as well as
first onset of manic symptoms in the general population. There is some evidence that becoming
married is less common among individuals with bipolar disorder than in the general population
and that a diagnosis of bipolar disorder is associated with being previously as opposed to
currently married.
Genetic processes strongly affect predisposition to bipolar disorder,
with heritability estimates around 90% in some twin studies. Risk of bipolar disorder in the
general population is around 1%, while risk in a first-degree relative is 5%–10%. However,
monozygotic concordance rates are significantly less than 100% (40%–70%), indicating that
much risk is left unexplained by genes alone. The mechanism of heritability is not Mendelian,
and involves multiple genes (or more complex genetic mechanisms) of small effect, interacting
with each other, the environment, and random factors. Emerging genetic findings suggest that
mania- and depression-proneness are inherited separately, and bipolar disorder shares a genetic
origin with schizophrenia.
