Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Bipolar I disorder symptoms tend to be consistent across cultural contexts, but some variation
exists in symptom expression and interpretation. For example, individuals from different cultural
backgrounds with bipolar I disorder, with psychotic features, may vary in the prevalence of flight
of ideas or types of delusions (e.g., grandiose, persecutory, sexual, religious, or somatic).
Cultural factors may affect disorder prevalence. For example, countries with reward-oriented
cultural values that place significance on individual pursuit of reward have a relatively higher
prevalence of bipolar disorder. In the United States, individuals with bipolar disorder had an
earlier age at onset than those in Europe and were more likely to have a family history of
psychiatric disorder.
Culture also influences clinician diagnostic practices regarding bipolar disorder. Compared
with non-Latinx Whites in the United States, African Americans with bipolar I disorder are at
higher risk of being misdiagnosed with schizophrenia. Possible reasons include underrecognition
of mood symptoms, cultural and linguistic misunderstanding between clinicians and the
individuals presenting for treatment (e.g., misinterpretation of cultural mistrust as paranoia),
more florid psychotic symptoms at presentation due to delay in receiving services, and diagnoses
based on shorter clinical assessments. These factors may result in discriminatory misdiagnosis of
schizophrenia, particularly in African Americans with mood disorders who present with
psychotic features.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Women may be more likely to experience rapid cycling and mixed states, and to have patterns of
comorbidity that differ from those of men, including higher rates of lifetime eating
148
disorders. Women with bipolar I or II disorder are more likely to experience depressive
symptoms than are men. They also have a higher lifetime risk of alcohol use disorder than do
men and a much greater likelihood of alcohol use disorder than do women in the general
population.
Some women with bipolar disorder experience exacerbation of mood symptoms during the
premenstrual time period, and this has been associated with a worse course of illness. Many
women with bipolar disorder also report severe emotional disturbances during perimenopause
when estrogen levels are decreasing. There does not appear to be an increased risk of mood
episodes in pregnant women with bipolar disorder except in those who discontinue medications
for pregnancy. In contrast, there is strong and consistent evidence for an increased risk of mood
episodes (both depression and mania) in women with bipolar I disorder in the postpartum period.
The specifier “with peripartum onset” should be used for mood episodes that begin during
pregnancy or within 4 weeks of delivery. “Postpartum psychosis” typically resembles a manic or
mixed mood episode with psychotic symptoms and is strongly associated with bipolar I disorder.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
The lifetime risk of suicide in individuals with bipolar disorder is estimated to be 20- to 30-fold
greater than in the general population. An estimated 5%–6% of individuals with bipolar disorders
