Major depressive disorder.
Other bipolar disorders.
Generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, or other anxiety
disorders.
Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition.
die by suicide. While suicide attempts are higher in women, lethal suicide is more common in
men with bipolar disorder. A past history of suicide attempt and percent days spent depressed in
the past year are associated with greater risk of suicide attempts or completions. Nearly half of
individuals whose symptoms meet criteria for bipolar disorder have an alcohol use disorder, and
those with both disorders are at greater risk for suicide attempt and suicide death.
Functional Consequences of Bipolar I Disorder
Approximately 30% of individuals with bipolar disorder show severe impairment in work role
functioning, although many individuals return to a fully functional level between episodes.
Functional recovery lags substantially behind recovery from symptoms, especially with respect
to occupational recovery, resulting in lower socioeconomic status despite equivalent levels of
education when compared with the general population. Cognitive impairments persist through
the lifespan, even during euthymic periods, and may contribute to vocational and interpersonal
difficulties. Higher level of self-perceived stigma is associated with lower level of functioning.
Differential Diagnosis
There is a risk of misdiagnosing bipolar I disorder as unipolar
depression because of the prominence of depression in the presentation of bipolar I disorder: 1)
the first episode of bipolar disorder is often depressive, 2) depressive symptoms are the most
frequent symptoms experienced across the long-term course of bipolar I disorder, and 3) the
problem for which individuals typically seek help is depression. When the individual presents in
an episode of major depression, it is therefore important to actively probe for a history of mania
or hypomania. Factors that might indicate that the diagnosis is bipolar I disorder rather than
major depressive disorder in an individual presenting with a current depressive episode include
family history of bipolar disorder, onset of illness in early 20s, numerous past episodes, presence
of psychotic symptoms, and a history of lack of response to antidepressant treatment or the
emergence of a manic episode during antidepressant treatment (e.g., medication,
electroconvulsive therapy).
Bipolar II disorder, cyclothymic disorder, and other specified bipolar and
related disorder are similar to bipolar I disorder by virtue of their including
149
periods of hypomanic symptoms in their presentations but are differentiated from bipolar I
disorder by the absence of any manic episodes.
A
careful history of symptoms is needed to differentiate generalized anxiety disorder from bipolar
disorder, as anxious ruminations may be mistaken for racing thoughts (and vice versa), and
efforts to minimize anxious feelings may be taken as impulsive behavior. Similarly, symptoms of
posttraumatic stress disorder need to be differentiated from bipolar disorder. It is helpful to
assess the episodic nature of the symptoms described (classical bipolar I is episodic), as well as
to consider symptom triggers, in making this differential diagnosis.
The diagnosis of bipolar and related
