Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder.
Schizoaffective disorder.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
Personality disorders.
disorder due to another medical condition should be made instead of bipolar I disorder if the
manic episodes are judged, based on history, laboratory findings, or physical examination, to be
the direct physiological consequence of another medical condition (e.g., Cushing’s disease,
multiple sclerosis).
A substance/medication-induced bipolar
and related disorder is distinguished from bipolar I disorder by the fact that a substance (e.g.,
stimulants, phencyclidine) or medication (e.g., steroids) is judged to be etiologically related to
the manic episode. Because individuals with a manic episode have a tendency to overuse
substances during an episode, it is important to determine whether the substance use is a
consequence of a primary manic episode or whether the manic-like episode has been caused by
the substance use. In some cases, a definitive diagnosis may involve establishing that the manic
symptoms remain once the individual is no longer using the substance. Note that manic episodes
emerging in the context of treatment with an antidepressant medication but that persist at a fully
syndromal level beyond the physiological effect of the medication warrant a diagnosis of bipolar
I disorder rather than substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder.
Schizoaffective disorder is characterized by periods in which manic and
major depressive episodes are concurrent with the active phase symptoms of schizophrenia and
periods in which delusions or hallucinations occur for at least 2 weeks in the absence of a manic
or major depressive episode. The diagnosis is “bipolar I disorder, with psychotic features” if the
psychotic symptoms have occurred exclusively during manic and major depressive episodes.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder is characterized by
persistent symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity, which may resemble the
symptoms of a manic episode (e.g., distractibility, increased activity, impulsive behavior) and
have their onset by age 12. In contrast, the symptoms of mania in bipolar I disorder occur in
distinct episodes and typically begin in late adolescence or early adulthood.
In individuals with severe irritability, particularly children
and adolescents, care must be taken to apply the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder only to those who
have had a clear episode of mania or hypomania—that is, a distinct time period, of the required
duration, during which the irritability was clearly different from the individual’s baseline and
was accompanied by the onset of the other characteristic symptoms of mania (e.g., grandiosity,
decreased need for sleep, pressured speech, involvement in activities with a high potential for
painful consequences). When a child’s irritability is persistent and particularly severe, the
diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder would be more appropriate. Indeed, when
any child is being assessed for mania, it is essential that the symptoms represent a clear change
from the child’s typical behavior.
150
Personality disorders such as borderline personality disorder may have
substantial symptomatic overlap with bipolar I disorder, since mood lability and impulsivity are
common in both conditions. In order to make a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder, symptoms of
mood lability and impulsivity must represent a distinct episode of illness, or there must be a
noticeable increase in these symptoms over the individual’s baseline in order to justify an
additional diagnosis of bipolar I disorder.
