F31.81
Comorbidity
Co-occurring mental disorders are the norm in bipolar I disorder, with the majority of individuals
having a history of three or more disorders. The most frequently comorbid disorders are anxiety
disorders, alcohol use disorder, other substance use disorder, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder. Sociocultural factors influence the pattern of comorbid conditions in bipolar disorder.
For example, countries with cultural prohibitions against alcohol or other substance use may
have a lower prevalence of substance use comorbidity. Bipolar I disorder is frequently associated
with borderline, schizotypal, and antisocial personality disorder. In particular, although the
underlying nature of the relationship between bipolar I disorder and borderline personality
disorder is unclear, the substantial comorbidity between the two may reflect similarities in
phenomenology (i.e., misdiagnosing the emotional extremes of borderline personality disorder as
bipolar I disorder), the influence of borderline personality features on vulnerability to bipolar I
disorder, and the impact of early childhood adversity on the development of both bipolar I and
borderline personality disorder.
Individuals with bipolar I disorder also have high rates of serious co-occurring and often
untreated medical conditions, which largely explain the shortened life expectancy of those with
bipolar disorder. Comorbidities appear in multiple organ systems, with cardiovascular and
autoimmune diseases, obstructive sleep apnea, metabolic syndrome, and migraine more common
among individuals with bipolar disorder than in the general population. Comorbid
overweight/obesity is a particular concern for individuals with bipolar disorder and is associated
with poor treatment outcomes.
Bipolar II Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
For a diagnosis of bipolar II disorder, it is necessary to meet the following criteria for
a current or past hypomanic episode and the following criteria for a current or past
major depressive episode:
Hypomanic Episode
A. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable
mood and abnormally and persistently increased activity or energy, lasting at
least 4 consecutive days and present most of the day, nearly every day.
B. During the period of mood disturbance and increased energy and activity, three
(or more) of the following symptoms have persisted (four if the mood is only
irritable), represent a noticeable change from usual behavior, and have been
present to a significant degree:
1. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
2. Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hours of sleep).
3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
