151
5. Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to unimportant or irrelevant
external stimuli), as reported or observed.
6. Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or
sexually) or psychomotor agitation.
7. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful
consequences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual
indiscretions, or foolish business investments).
C. The episode is associated with an unequivocal change in functioning that is
uncharacteristic of the individual when not symptomatic.
D. The disturbance in mood and the change in functioning are observable by
others.
E. The episode is not severe enough to cause marked impairment in social or
occupational functioning or to necessitate hospitalization. If there are psychotic
features, the episode is, by definition, manic.
F. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
drug of abuse, a medication, other treatment) or another medical condition.
Note: A full hypomanic episode that emerges during antidepressant treatment
(e.g., medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully syndromal
level beyond the physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a
hypomanic episode diagnosis. However, caution is indicated so that one or two
symptoms (particularly increased irritability, edginess, or agitation following
antidepressant use) are not taken as sufficient for diagnosis of a hypomanic
episode, nor necessarily indicative of a bipolar diathesis.
Major Depressive Episode
A. Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during the same 2-
week period and represent a change from previous functioning; at least one of
the symptoms is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.
Note: Do not include symptoms that are clearly attributable to a medical
condition.
1. Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either
subjective report (e.g., feels sad, empty, or hopeless) or observation made by
others (e.g., appears tearful). (Note: In children and adolescents, can be
irritable mood.)
2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most of
the day, nearly every day (as indicated by either subjective account or
observation).
3. Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of
more than 5% of body weight in a month), or decrease or increase in appetite
nearly every day. (Note: In children, consider failure to make expected weight
