gain.)
4. Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
5. Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others,
not merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed down).
6. Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
7. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be
delusional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or guilt about being
sick).
8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day
(either by subjective account or as observed by others).
9. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ideation
without a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for committing
suicide.
B. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or
another medical condition.
Note: Criteria A–C constitute a major depressive episode.
152
Note: Responses to a significant loss (e.g., bereavement, financial ruin, losses from
a natural disaster, a serious medical illness or disability) may include the feelings of
intense sadness, rumination about the loss, insomnia, poor appetite, and weight loss
noted in Criterion A, which may resemble a depressive episode. Although such
symptoms may be understandable or considered appropriate to the loss, the
presence of a major depressive episode in addition to the normal response to a
significant loss should be carefully considered. This decision inevitably requires the
exercise of clinical judgment based on the individual’s history and the cultural norms
for the expression of distress in the context of loss.1
Bipolar II Disorder
A. Criteria have been met for at least one hypomanic episode (Criteria A–F under
“Hypomanic Episode” above) and at least one major depressive episode (Criteria
A–C under “Major Depressive Episode” above).
B. There has never been a manic episode.
C. At least one hypomanic episode and at least one major depressive episode are
not better explained by schizoaffective disorder and are not superimposed on
schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or other specified
or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.
D. The symptoms of depression or the unpredictability caused by frequent
alternation between periods of depression and hypomania causes clinically
significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
