areas of functioning.
Coding and Recording Procedures
Bipolar II disorder has one diagnostic code: F31.81. Its status with respect to current
severity, presence of psychotic features, course, and other specifiers cannot be
coded but should be indicated in writing (e.g., F31.81 bipolar II disorder, current
episode depressed, moderate severity, with mixed features; F31.81 bipolar II
disorder, most recent episode depressed, in partial remission).
Specify current or most recent episode:
Hypomanic
Depressed
If current episode is hypomanic (or most recent episode if bipolar II disorder is in
partial or full remission):
153
In recording the diagnosis, terms should be listed in the following order: bipolar II
disorder, current or most recent episode hypomanic, in partial remission/in full
remission (p. 175) (if full criteria for a hypomanic episode are not currently met),
plus any of the following hypomanic episode specifiers that are applicable. Note:
The specifiers “with rapid cycling” and “with seasonal pattern” describe the
pattern of mood episodes.
Specify if:
With anxious distress (p. 169–170)
With mixed features (pp. 170–171)
With rapid cycling (p. 171)
With peripartum onset (pp. 173–174)
With seasonal pattern (pp. 174–175)
If current episode is depressed (or most recent episode if bipolar II disorder is in
partial or full remission):
In recording the diagnosis, terms should be listed in the following order: bipolar II
disorder, current or most recent episode depressed, mild/moderate/severe (if full
criteria for a major depressive episode are currently met), in partial remission/in
full remission (if full criteria for a major depressive episode are not currently met)
(p. 175), plus any of the following major depressive episode specifiers that are
applicable. Note: The specifiers “with rapid cycling” and “with seasonal pattern”
describe the pattern of mood episodes.
Specify if:
With anxious distress (pp. 169–170)
With mixed features (pp. 170–171)
With rapid cycling (p. 171)
With melancholic features (pp. 171–172)
