With atypical features (pp. 172–173)
With mood-congruent psychotic features (p. 173)
With mood-incongruent psychotic features (p. 173)
With catatonia (p. 173). Coding note: Use additional code F06.1.
With peripartum onset (pp. 172–174)
With seasonal pattern (pp. 174–175)
Specify course if full criteria for a mood episode are not currently met:
In partial remission (p. 175)
In full remission (p. 175)
Specify severity if full criteria for a major depressive episode are currently met:
Mild (p. 175)
Moderate (p. 175)
Severe (p. 175)
Diagnostic Features
Bipolar II disorder is characterized by a clinical course of recurring mood episodes consisting of
one or more major depressive episodes (Criteria A–C under “Major Depressive Episode”) and at
least one hypomanic episode (Criteria A–F under “Hypomanic Episode”). A diagnosis of a major
depressive episode requires that there be a period of depressed mood, or as an alternative,
marked diminished interest or pleasure, for most of the day nearly every day, lasting for a
minimum of 2 weeks. The depressed mood or loss of interest must be accompanied by additional
symptoms occurring nearly every day (e.g., sleep disturbance, psychomotor agitation or
retardation) for a total of at least five symptoms. The diagnosis of a hypomanic episode requires
that there be a distinct period of
154
abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and abnormally and
persistently increased activity or energy for most of the day, nearly every day, for at least 4
consecutive days accompanied by three (or four if mood is only irritable) additional symptoms
(e.g., inflated self-esteem, decreased need for sleep, distractibility) that persist and represent a
noticeable change from usual behavior and functioning. By definition, psychotic symptoms do
not occur in hypomanic episodes, and they appear to be less frequent in the major depressive
episodes in bipolar II disorder than in those of bipolar I disorder. The presence of a manic
episode during the course of illness precludes the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder (Criterion B
under “Bipolar II Disorder”). Moreover, for depressive and hypomanic episodes to count toward
the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder, at least one of the depressive episodes and at least one of the
hypomanic episodes must not be attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (i.e.,
medication, drug of abuse, or toxin exposure) or another medical condition. Note that hypomanic
episodes that emerge during antidepressant treatment and persist for at least 4 days at a fully
syndromal level beyond the physiological effects of the treatment are not considered to be
