substance-induced and do count toward the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder. In addition, at least
one hypomanic episode and at least one major depressive episode are not explained by a
diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder and are not superimposed on schizophrenia,
schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia
spectrum or other psychotic disorder (Criterion C under “Bipolar II Disorder”). The depressive
episodes or the pattern of unpredictable mood changes must cause clinically significant distress
or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion D under
“Bipolar II Disorder”). The recurrent major depressive episodes are often more frequent and
lengthier than those occurring in bipolar I disorder.
Individuals with bipolar II disorder typically present to a clinician during a major depressive
episode. They are unlikely to complain initially of hypomania, because either they do not
recognize the symptoms of hypomania or they consider hypomania desirable. Hypomanic
episodes by definition do not cause significant impairment. Instead, the impairment results from
the major depressive episodes or from a persistent pattern of unpredictable mood changes and
fluctuating, unreliable interpersonal or occupational functioning. Individuals with bipolar II
disorder may not view the hypomanic episodes as pathological or disadvantageous, although
others may be troubled by the individual’s erratic behavior. Clinical information from other
informants, such as close friends or relatives, is often useful in establishing the diagnosis of
bipolar II disorder.
A hypomanic episode should not be confused with the several days of euthymia and restored
energy or activity that may follow remission of a major depressive episode. Despite the
substantial differences in duration and severity between a manic and hypomanic episode, bipolar
II disorder is not a “milder form” of bipolar I disorder. Compared to individuals with bipolar I
disorder, individuals with bipolar II disorder have greater chronicity of illness and spend, on
average, more time in the depressive phase of their illness, which can be severe and/or disabling.
Although the diagnostic requirements for major depressive episodes are identical whether
they occur in the context of bipolar II disorder or major depressive disorder, certain clinical
features of the episodes may hint at possible differential diagnosis. For instance, the coexistence
of both insomnia and hypersomnia is not uncommon in major depressive episodes in both bipolar
II disorder and major depressive disorder; however, both insomnia and hypersomnia are
overrepresented among women with bipolar II disorder. Similarly, atypical depressive symptoms
(hypersomnia, hyperphagia) are common in both disorders, but more so in those with bipolar II
disorder.
Depressive symptoms co-occurring with a hypomanic episode or hypomanic symptoms co-
occurring with a depressive episode are common in individuals with bipolar II disorder and are
overrepresented in females, particularly hypomania with mixed features.
155
Individuals experiencing hypomania with mixed features may not label their symptoms as
hypomania, but instead experience them as depression with increased energy or irritability.
Associated Features
A common feature of bipolar II disorder is impulsivity, which can contribute to suicide attempts
