and substance use disorders.
There may be heightened levels of creativity during hypomanic episodes in some individuals
with a bipolar II disorder. However, that relationship may be nonlinear; that is, greater lifetime
creative accomplishments have been associated with milder forms of bipolar disorder, and higher
creativity has been found in unaffected family members. The individual’s attachment to the
prospect of heightened creativity during hypomanic episodes may contribute to ambivalence
about seeking treatment or undermine adherence to treatment.
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence of bipolar II disorder in the United States is 0.8%. The 12-month
prevalence internationally is 0.3%. The prevalence rate of pediatric bipolar II disorder is difficult
to establish. DSM-IV bipolar I, bipolar II, and bipolar disorder not otherwise specified yield a
combined prevalence rate of 1.8% in U.S. and non-U.S. community samples, with higher rates
(2.7% inclusive) in youth age 12 years or older.
Development and Course
Although bipolar II disorder can begin in late adolescence and throughout adulthood, average
age at onset is the mid-20s, which is slightly later than for bipolar I disorder but earlier than for
major depressive disorder. Age at onset does not reliably distinguish between bipolar I and II
disorder. The illness most often begins with a depressive episode and is not recognized as bipolar
II disorder until a hypomanic episode occurs; this happens in about 12% of individuals with the
initial diagnosis of major depressive disorder. Anxiety, substance use, or eating disorders may
also precede the diagnosis, complicating its detection. Many individuals experience several
episodes of major depression prior to the first recognized hypomanic episode, with typically a
more than 10-year lag between illness onset and the diagnosis of a bipolar disorder.
Bipolar II disorder is a highly recurrent disorder, with over 50% of individuals experiencing
a new episode within a year after their first episode. Individuals with bipolar II disorder also
have more seasonal variation in mood compared to those with bipolar I disorder.
The number of lifetime episodes (both hypomanic and major depressive episodes) tends to be
higher for bipolar II disorder than for major depressive disorder or bipolar I disorder. However,
individuals with bipolar I disorder are actually more likely to experience hypomanic symptoms
than are individuals with bipolar II disorder. The interval between mood episodes in the course
of bipolar II disorder tends to decrease as the individual ages. While the hypomanic episode is
the feature that defines bipolar II disorder, depressive episodes are more enduring and disabling
over time. Despite the predominance of depression, once a hypomanic episode has occurred, the
diagnosis becomes bipolar II disorder and never reverts to major depressive disorder.
Approximately 5%–15% of individuals with bipolar II disorder have multiple (four or more)
mood episodes (hypomanic or major depressive) within the previous 12 months. If this pattern is
present, it is noted by the specifier “with rapid cycling.” Rapid cycling is more common in
women and may reflect an overall worsening of the bipolar disorder.
Switching from a depressive episode to a manic or hypomanic episode (with or without
mixed features) may occur, both spontaneously and during treatment for depression.
156
