Genetic and physiological.
Course modifiers.
About 5%–15% of individuals with bipolar II disorder will ultimately develop a manic
episode, which changes the diagnosis to bipolar I disorder, regardless of subsequent course.
Making the diagnosis in children is often a challenge, especially in those with irritability and
hyperarousal that is nonepisodic (i.e., lacks the well-demarcated periods of altered mood).
Nonepisodic irritability in youth is associated with an elevated risk for anxiety disorders and
major depressive disorder, but not bipolar disorder, in adulthood. Persistently irritable youth
have lower familial rates of bipolar disorder than do youth who have bipolar disorder. For a
hypomanic episode to be diagnosed, the child’s symptoms must exceed what is expected in a
given environment and culture for the child’s developmental stage. Similar to adults, youth with
bipolar II disorder spend less time hypomanic compared to those with bipolar I disorder, and the
initial presenting episode is typically depression. Compared with adult onset of bipolar II
disorder, childhood or adolescent onset of the disorder may be associated with a more severe
lifetime course.
The 3-year incidence rate of first-onset bipolar II disorder in adults older than 60 years is
0.34%. However, distinguishing individuals older than 60 years with bipolar II disorder by late
versus early age at onset does not appear to have any clinical utility. The presence of co-
occurring hypomanic symptoms during a depressive episode is more common during bipolar II
depressive episodes relative to depressive episodes occurring in the context of major depression
and may help distinguish older individuals with bipolar II disorder from those with major
depressive disorder. In any later life presentation of bipolar disorder, it is important to consider
medical factors, including possible medical and neurological causes of new symptoms.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
The risk of bipolar II disorder tends to be highest among relatives of
individuals with bipolar II disorder, as opposed to individuals with bipolar I disorder or major
depressive disorder. About a third of individuals with bipolar II disorder reported a family
history of bipolar disorder. There may be genetic factors influencing the age at onset for bipolar
disorders. Th ere is also evidence that bipolar II disorder may have a genetic architecture that is
at least partially distinct from bipolar I disorder and from schizophrenia.
A rapid-cycling pattern is associated with a poorer prognosis. Return to
previous level of social function for individuals with bipolar II disorder is more likely for
individuals of younger age and with less severe depression, suggesting adverse effects of
prolonged illness on recovery. More education, fewer years of illness, and being married are
independently associated with functional recovery in individuals with bipolar disorder, even after
diagnostic type (I vs. II), current depressive symptoms, and presence of psychiatric comorbidity
are taken into account.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Whereas the gender ratio for bipolar I disorder is equal, findings on gender differences in bipolar
II disorder are mixed, differing by type of sample (i.e., registry, community, or clinical) and
country of origin. There is little to no evidence of bipolar gender differences in the general
population, whereas some, but not all, clinical samples suggest that bipolar II disorder is more
common in women than in men, which may reflect gender differences in treatment seeking or
other factors.
