Major depressive disorder.
Patterns of illness and comorbidity, however, seem to differ by sex, with females being more
likely than males to report hypomania with mixed depressive features and a rapid-cycling course.
Childbirth may also be a specific trigger for a hypomanic episode, which can occur in 10%–20%
of females in nonclinical populations and most typically in the early postpartum period.
Distinguishing hypomania from the elated mood and reduced sleep
157
that normally accompany the birth of a child may be challenging. Postpartum hypomania
may foreshadow the onset of a depression that occurs in about half of females who experience
postpartum “highs.” The perimenopause transition can also be a time of mood instability in
bipolar II disorder. No major sex differences have been found in several clinical variables,
including rates of depressive episodes, age at and polarity of onset, symptoms, and severity of
the illness.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Approximately one-third of individuals with bipolar II disorder report a lifetime history of
suicide attempt. The risk and incidence of attempted suicide in bipolar II and bipolar I disorder
appear to be similar. Overall there appears to be about equal rates of suicide attempts and suicide
deaths across individuals with bipolar II and bipolar I disorder, although overall the rates for both
attempts and deaths are significantly higher than in the general population. Time spent in a
depressive episode is associated more significantly with the diagnosis of bipolar I or bipolar II in
terms of suicide attempt risk. However, the lethality of attempts, as defined by a lower ratio of
attempts to suicide deaths, may be higher in individuals with bipolar II disorder compared to
individuals with bipolar I disorder. There may be an association between genetic markers and
increased risk for suicidal behavior in individuals with bipolar disorder, including a 6.5-fold
higher risk of suicide among first-degree relatives of bipolar II probands compared with first-
degree relatives of bipolar I probands.
Functional Consequences of Bipolar II Disorder
Although many individuals with bipolar II disorder return to a fully functional level between
mood episodes, at least 15% continue to have some interepisode dysfunction, and 20% transition
directly into another mood episode without interepisode recovery. Functional recovery lags
substantially behind recovery from symptoms of bipolar II disorder, especially in regard to
occupational recovery, resulting in lower socioeconomic status despite equivalent levels of
education with the general population. Individuals with bipolar II disorder perform more poorly
than healthy individuals on cognitive tests. Cognitive impairments associated with bipolar II
disorder may contribute to vocational difficulties. Prolonged unemployment in individuals with
bipolar disorder is associated with more episodes of depression, older age, increased rates of
current panic disorder, and lifetime history of alcohol use disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Major depressive disorder is characterized by the absence of both
manic episodes and hypomanic episodes. Given that the presence of some manic or hypomanic
