Cyclothymic disorder.
Schizophrenia.
Schizoaffective disorder.
Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition.
Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder.
symptoms (e.g., fewer symptoms or shorter duration than required for hypomania) may still be
compatible with a diagnosis of major depressive disorder, it is important to ascertain whether the
symptoms meet criteria for a hypomanic episode to determine whether it is more appropriate to
make the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder. Depressive episodes dominate the overall course of
illness for most individuals with bipolar II disorder, contributing to the decade-long lag between
illness onset and the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder. Because the diagnostic criteria for major
depressive episode are identical in major depressive disorder and bipolar II disorder, the
diagnosis of bipolar II disorder can be made only by eliciting information about at least one prior
hypomanic episode in order to distinguish the bipolar II disorder from major depressive disorder.
In cyclothymic disorder, there are numerous periods of hypomanic
symptoms that do not meet symptom or duration criteria for a hypomanic episode and numerous
periods of depressive symptoms that do not meet symptom or duration criteria for a major
depressive episode. Bipolar II disorder is distinguished from cyclothymic disorder by the
presence of one or more hypomanic episodes and one or more major depressive episodes.
158
Schizophrenia is characterized by active-phase psychotic symptoms that may be
accompanied by major depressive episodes. The diagnosis of schizophrenia is made if no major
depressive episodes have occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms. If they have
occurred concurrently, the diagnosis of schizophrenia is made if the major depressive episodes
have been present for only a minority of the time. The diagnosis is bipolar II disorder, with
psychotic features, if the psychotic symptoms have occurred exclusively during major depressive
episodes.
Schizoaffective disorder is characterized by periods in which depressive
symptoms are concurrent with the active-phase symptoms of schizophrenia and periods in which
delusions or hallucinations occur for at least 2 weeks in the absence of a major depressive
episode. The diagnosis is bipolar II disorder, with psychotic features, if the psychotic symptoms
have occurred exclusively during major depressive episodes.
The diagnosis of bipolar and related
disorder due to another medical condition should be made instead of bipolar II disorder if the
hypomanic episodes are judged, based on history, laboratory findings, or physical examination,
to be the direct physiological consequence of another medical condition (e.g., Cushing’s disease,
multiple sclerosis).
A substance/medication-induced bipolar
and related disorder is distinguished from bipolar II disorder by the fact that a substance (e.g.,
stimulants, phencyclidine) or medication (e.g., steroids) is judged to be etiologically related to
the hypomanic and major depressive episodes. Because individuals with a hypomanic episode
have a tendency to overuse substances during an episode, it is important to determine whether
the substance use is a consequence of a primary hypomanic episode or whether the hypomanic-
like episode has been caused by the substance use. In some cases, a definitive diagnosis may
involve establishing that the hypomanic symptoms or depressive symptoms remain once the
individual is no longer using the substance. Note that hypomanic episodes emerging in the
context of treatment with an antidepressant medication but persisting at a fully syndromal level
