Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Personality disorders.
Other bipolar disorders.
beyond the physiological effect of the medication warrant a diagnosis of bipolar II disorder
rather than substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) may be
misdiagnosed as bipolar II disorder, especially in adolescents and children. Many symptoms of
ADHD, such as excessive talking, distractibility, and less need for sleep, overlap with the
symptoms of hypomania. The double counting of symptoms toward both ADHD and bipolar II
disorder can be avoided if the clinician clarifies whether the symptoms represent a distinct
episode and if the noticeable increase over baseline required for the diagnosis of bipolar II
disorder is present.
The same convention as applies for ADHD also applies when evaluating an
individual for a personality disorder such as borderline personality disorder because mood
lability and impulsivity are common in both personality disorders and bipolar II disorder.
Symptoms must represent a distinct episode, and the noticeable increase over baseline required
for the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder must be present. A diagnosis of a personality disorder
should not be made during an untreated mood episode unless the lifetime history supports the
presence of a personality disorder.
Diagnosis of bipolar II disorder should be differentiated from bipolar I
disorder by carefully considering whether there have been any past episodes of mania and from
other specified and unspecified bipolar and related disorders by confirming the presence of fully
syndromal hypomania and depression.
159
Comorbidity
Bipolar II disorder is more often than not associated with one or more co-occurring mental
disorders, with anxiety disorders being the most common. Approximately 60% of individuals
with bipolar II disorder have three or more co-occurring mental disorders; 75% have an anxiety
disorder, most commonly social anxiety (38%), specific phobia (36%), and generalized anxiety
(30%). Lifetime prevalence of comorbid anxiety disorder does not differ between bipolar I and
bipolar II disorders but is associated with a worse course of illness. Children and adolescents
with bipolar II disorder have a higher rate of co-occurring anxiety disorders compared to those
with bipolar I disorder, and the anxiety disorder most often predates the bipolar disorder.
Anxiety and substance use disorders occur in individuals with bipolar II disorder at a higher
rate than in the general population. It should be noted that co-occurring anxiety and substance
use disorder do not seem to follow a course of illness that is truly independent from that of
bipolar II disorder, but rather have strong associations with mood states. For example, anxiety
disorders tend to associate most with depressive symptoms, and substance use disorders are
moderately associated with hypomanic symptoms.
The prevalence of substance use disorders appears to be similar between bipolar I and bipolar
II disorders, most commonly alcohol use (42%) and cannabis use (20%) disorders. Sociocultural
factors influence the pattern of comorbid conditions in bipolar II disorder. For example,
countries with cultural prohibitions against alcohol or other substance use may have a lower
prevalence of substance use comorbidity.
Individuals with bipolar II disorder appear to have lower rates of comorbid posttraumatic
