F34.0
stress disorder compared to individuals with bipolar I disorder.
Approximately 14% of individuals with bipolar II disorder have at least one lifetime eating
disorder, with binge-eating disorder being more common than bulimia nervosa and anorexia
nervosa.
Premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual dysphoric disorder are common in women with
bipolar disorder, especially in those with bipolar II disorder. Among women who have
premenstrual syndrome and/or premenstrual dysphoric disorder, bipolar mood symptoms and
lability may be more severe.
Individuals with bipolar II disorder also have comorbid medical conditions, which have the
potential to substantially complicate course and prognosis. These include cardiovascular disease,
migraine, and autoimmune disorders.
Cyclothymic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. For at least 2 years (at least 1 year in children and adolescents) there have been
numerous periods with hypomanic symptoms that do not meet criteria for a
hypomanic episode and numerous periods with depressive symptoms that do
not meet criteria for a major depressive episode.
B. During the above 2-year period (1 year in children and adolescents), Criterion A
symptoms have been present for at least half the time and the individual has not
been without the symptoms for more than 2 months at a time.
C. Criteria for a major depressive, manic, or hypomanic episode have never been
met.
D. The symptoms in Criterion A are not better explained by schizoaffective disorder,
schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or other specified
or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.
E. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g.,
hyperthyroidism).
160
F. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
With anxious distress (see pp. 169–170)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of cyclothymic disorder is a chronic, fluctuating mood disturbance
