involving numerous periods of hypomanic symptoms and periods of depressive symptoms
(Criterion A). The hypomanic symptoms are of insufficient number, severity, pervasiveness,
and/or duration to meet full criteria for a hypomanic episode, and the depressive symptoms are of
insufficient number, severity, pervasiveness, and/or duration to meet full criteria for a major
depressive episode. During the initial 2-year period (1 year for children or adolescents), the
symptoms must be persistent (present more days than not), and any symptom-free intervals last
no longer than 2 months (Criterion B). The diagnosis of cyclothymic disorder is made only if the
criteria for a major depressive, manic, or hypomanic episode have never been met (Criterion C).
If an individual with cyclothymic disorder subsequently (i.e., after the initial 2 years in adults
or 1 year in children or adolescents) experiences a major depressive, manic, or hypomanic
episode, the diagnosis changes to major depressive disorder, bipolar I disorder, or other specified
or unspecified bipolar and related disorder (subclassified as hypomanic episode without prior
major depressive episode), respectively, and the cyclothymic disorder diagnosis is dropped.
The cyclothymic disorder diagnosis is not made if the pattern of mood swings is better
explained by schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional
disorder, or other specified and unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
disorders (Criterion D), in which case the mood symptoms are considered associated features of
the psychotic disorder. The mood disturbance must also not be attributable to the physiological
effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g.,
hyperthyroidism) (Criterion E). Although some individuals may function particularly well during
some of the periods of hypomania, over the prolonged course of the disorder, there must be
clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning as a result of the mood disturbance (Criterion F). The prolonged pattern of repeated,
often unpredictable mood changes may lead to impairment attributable to the negative effects of
the symptoms themselves combined with negative effects that the pattern of unpredictability and
inconsistency has on interpersonal functioning and role performance (i.e., familial, occupational
roles).
Prevalence
The lifetime prevalence of cyclothymic disorder in the United States and Europe is
approximately 0.4%–2.5%. Prevalence in mood disorders clinics may range from 3% to 5%. In
the general population, cyclothymic disorder is apparently equally common in males and
females. In clinical settings, females with cyclothymic disorder may be more likely to present for
treatment than males.
Development and Course
Cyclothymic disorder usually begins in adolescence or early adult life and is sometimes
considered to reflect a temperamental predisposition to other disorders in this chapter. The vast
majority of youth with cyclothymic disorder experience the onset of mood symptoms before age
10. Cyclothymic disorder usually has an insidious onset and a persistent course. There is a 15%–
50% risk that an individual with cyclothymic disorder will
161
