Genetic and physiological.
Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition.
Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder and substance/medication-induced
depressive disorder.
Bipolar I disorder, with rapid cycling, and bipolar II disorder, with rapid cycling.
Borderline personality disorder.
subsequently develop bipolar I disorder or bipolar II disorder; diagnostic conversion rates are
higher in youth than in adults. Onset of persistent, fluctuating hypomanic and depressive
symptoms late in adult life needs to be clearly differentiated from bipolar and related disorder
due to another medical condition and depressive disorder due to another medical condition (e.g.,
multiple sclerosis) before the cyclothymic disorder diagnosis is assigned.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Major depressive disorder, bipolar I disorder, and bipolar II disorder
are more common among first-degree biological relatives of individuals with cyclothymic
disorder than in the general population. There may also be an increased familial risk of
substance-related disorders. Cyclothymic disorder may be more common in the first-degree
biological relatives of individuals with bipolar I disorder than in the general population.
Differential Diagnosis
The diagnosis of bipolar and related
disorder due to another medical condition is made when the mood disturbance is judged to be
attributable to the physiological effect of a specific, usually chronic medical condition (e.g.,
hyperthyroidism). This determination is based on the history, physical examination, and/or
laboratory findings. If it is judged that the hypomanic and depressive symptoms are not the
physiological consequence of the medical condition, then the primary mental disorder (i.e.,
cyclothymic disorder) and the medical condition are coded. For example, this would be the case
if the mood symptoms are considered to be the psychological (not the physiological)
consequence of having a chronic medical condition, or if there is no etiological relationship
between the hypomanic and depressive symptoms and the medical condition.
Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder and substance/medication-induced
depressive disorder are distinguished from cyclothymic disorder by the judgment that a
substance/medication (especially stimulants) is etiologically related to the mood disturbance. The
frequent mood swings in these disorders that are suggestive of cyclothymic disorder usually
resolve following cessation of substance/medication use.
Both 
disorders 
may
resemble cyclothymic disorder by virtue of the frequent marked shifts in mood. By definition, in
cyclothymic disorder the criteria for a major depressive, manic, or hypomanic episode have
never been met, whereas the bipolar I disorder and bipolar II disorder specifier “with rapid
cycling” requires that full mood episodes be present.
Borderline personality disorder is associated with recurrent, brief
marked shifts in mood that may suggest cyclothymic disorder. Engagement in potentially self-
damaging behaviors can be seen in both conditions but would need to occur in the context of
other hypomanic symptoms to be related to cyclothymia. Mood instability in borderline
personality disorder occurs in the domains of anxiety, irritability, and sadness, whereas elation,
euphoria, and/or increased energy are not characteristic features of borderline personality
disorder. If the criteria are met for both disorders, both borderline personality disorder and
cyclothymic disorder may be diagnosed.
