Comorbidity
Substance-related disorders and sleep disorders (i.e., difficulties in initiating and maintaining
sleep) may be present in individuals with cyclothymic disorder. Rates of comorbid
162
psychiatric disorders in children with cyclothymic disorder treated in outpatient psychiatric
settings are greater than those in children with disruptive behavior/attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder and similar to those in children with bipolar I or II disorder.
Substance/Medication-Induced Bipolar and Related
Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical
picture and is characterized by abnormally elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
and abnormally increased activity or energy.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
of both (1) and (2):
1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance
intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a
medication.
2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in
Criterion A.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by a bipolar or related disorder that is not
substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent bipolar or
related disorder could include the following:
The symptoms precede the onset of the substance/medication use; the
symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after
the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other
evidence 
suggesting 
the 
existence 
of 
an 
independent 
non-
substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder (e.g., a history of
recurrent non-substance/medication-related episodes).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance
intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A
predominate in the clinical picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant
