there is other evidence that suggests the existence of an independent non-substance/medication-
induced bipolar and related disorder (Criterion C), such as a history of recurrent non-substance-
induced manic episodes. Diagnosis of substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder
should not be made when symptoms occur exclusively during the course of a delirium (Criterion
D). Finally, the diagnosis requires that the substance/medication-induced symptoms cause
clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning (Criterion E). The substance-induced bipolar and related disorder diagnosis should
be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the
symptoms in Criterion A predominate in the clinical picture and are sufficiently severe to
warrant independent clinical attention.
A key exception to the diagnosis of substance/medication-induced bipolar and related
disorder is the case of hypomania or mania that occurs after antidepressant medication use or
other treatments and persists beyond the physiological effects of the medication. The persistence
of hypomania or mania is considered an indicator of true bipolar disorder, not
substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder. Similarly, individuals with apparent
electroconvulsive therapy–induced manic or hypomanic episodes that persist beyond the
physiological effects of the treatment are diagnosed with bipolar disorder, not
substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder. Furthermore, substance/medication-
induced bipolar and related symptoms may suggest an underlying bipolar diathesis in individuals
previously not diagnosed with bipolar disorders.
Side effects of some antidepressants and other psychotropic drugs (e.g., edginess, agitation)
may resemble the primary symptoms of a manic syndrome, but they are fundamentally distinct
from bipolar symptoms and are insufficient for the diagnosis. That is, the criterion symptoms of
mania/hypomania have specificity (simple agitation is not the same as excess involvement in
purposeful activities), and a sufficient number of symptoms must be present (not just one or two
symptoms) to make these diagnoses. In particular, the appearance of one or two nonspecific
symptoms—irritability, edginess, or agitation during antidepressant treatment—in the absence of
a full manic or hypomanic syndrome should not be taken to support a diagnosis of a bipolar
disorder.
Associated Features
Substances/medications that are typically considered to be associated with substance/medication-
induced bipolar and related disorder include the stimulant class of drugs, as
165
well as phencyclidine and steroids; however, a number of potential substances continue to
emerge as new compounds are synthesized (e.g., so-called bath salts).
Prevalence
Limited epidemiological data exist regarding the prevalence of substance/medication-induced
mania or bipolar disorder. Prevalence of substance-induced bipolar disorder will depend on
substance availability and level of substance use in a society; for example, countries with cultural
prohibitions against alcohol or other substance use may have a lower prevalence of substance-
