Substance intoxication and substance withdrawal.
related disorders.
Development and Course
In phencyclidine-induced mania, the initial presentation may be one of a delirium with affective
features, which then becomes an atypically appearing manic or mixed manic state. This condition
follows the ingestion or inhalation quickly, usually within hours or, at the most, a few days. In
stimulant-induced manic or hypomanic states, the response is in minutes to 1 hour after one or
several ingestions or injections. The episode is very brief and typically resolves over 1–2 days.
With corticosteroids and some immunosuppressant medications, the mania (or mixed or
depressed state) usually follows several days of ingestion, and the higher doses appear to have a
much greater likelihood of producing bipolar symptoms.
Diagnostic Markers
Determination of the substance of use can be made through markers in the blood or urine to
corroborate diagnosis.
Differential Diagnosis
Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder should be differentiated from other
bipolar disorders, substance intoxication, substance withdrawal, substance-induced delirium, and
medication side effects (as noted earlier). A full manic episode that emerges during
antidepressant treatment (e.g., medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully
syndromal level beyond the physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a
bipolar I diagnosis. A full hypomanic episode that emerges during antidepressant treatment (e.g.,
medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully syndromal level beyond the
physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a bipolar II diagnosis only if
preceded by a major depressive episode.
Euphoria, irritability, and increased energy may
occur in substance intoxication (e.g., stimulant intoxication) or substance withdrawal (e.g.,
cannabis withdrawal). The diagnosis of the substance-specific intoxication or substance-specific
withdrawal will usually suffice to categorize the symptom presentation. A diagnosis of
substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder either with onset during intoxication
or with onset during withdrawal should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication
or substance withdrawal when the euphoric or irritable mood or increased energy symptoms are
predominant in the clinical picture and are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention.
Comorbidity
Comorbidities are those associated with the use of illicit substances (in the case of illegal
stimulants or phencyclidine) or diversion of prescribed stimulants. Comorbidities related to
steroid or immunosuppressant medications are those medical indications for these preparations.
Delirium can occur before or along with manic symptoms in individuals ingesting phencyclidine
or those who are prescribed steroid medications or other immunosuppressant medications.
166
