Bipolar and Related Disorder Due to Another Medical
Condition
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical
picture and is characterized by abnormally elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
and abnormally increased activity or energy.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another
medical condition.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder.
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning, or necessitates
hospitalization to prevent harm to self or others, or there are psychotic features.
Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on the specifier (see below).
Specify if:
F06.33 With manic features: Full criteria are not met for a manic or hypomanic
episode.
F06.33 With manic- or hypomanic-like episode: Full criteria are met except
Criterion D for a manic episode or except Criterion F for a hypomanic episode.
F06.34 With mixed features: Symptoms of depression are also present but do
not predominate in the clinical picture.
Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the
mental disorder (e.g., F06.33 bipolar disorder due to hyperthyroidism, with manic
features). The other medical condition should also be coded and listed separately
immediately before the bipolar and related disorder due to the medical condition
(e.g., E05.90 hyperthyroidism; F06.33 bipolar disorder due to hyperthyroidism, with
manic features).
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition are
presence of a prominent and persistent period of abnormally elevated, expansive, or irritable
mood and abnormally increased activity or energy predominating in the clinical picture
(Criterion A) that is attributable to another medical condition (Criterion B). In most cases the
manic or hypomanic picture may appear during the initial presentation of the medical condition
(i.e., within 1 month); however, there are exceptions, especially in chronic medical conditions
that might worsen or relapse and herald the appearance of the manic or hypomanic picture.
Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition would not be diagnosed when the
