manic or hypomanic episodes definitely preceded the medical condition, because the proper
diagnosis would be bipolar disorder (except in the unusual circumstance in which all preceding
manic or hypomanic episodes—or, when only one such episode has occurred, the preceding
manic or hypomanic episode—were associated with ingestion of a substance/medication). The
diagnosis of bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition should not be made
during the course of a delirium (Criterion D). The manic or hypomanic episode in bipolar and
related disorder due to another medical condition must cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning to qualify for this
diagnosis (Criterion E).
167
Associated Features
The listing of medical conditions that are said to be able to induce mania is never complete, and
the clinician’s best judgment is the essence of this diagnosis. Among the best known of the
medical conditions that can cause a bipolar manic or hypomanic condition are Cushing’s disease
and multiple sclerosis, as well as stroke and traumatic brain injuries. Antibodies to the N-methyl-
D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor have been associated with manic or mixed mood and psychotic
symptoms. In such cases, the causative medical condition would be anti-NMDA receptor
encephalitis.
Development and Course
Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition usually has its onset acutely or
subacutely within the first weeks or month of the onset of the associated medical condition.
However, this is not always the case, as a worsening or later relapse of the associated medical
condition may precede the onset of the manic or hypomanic syndrome. The clinician must make
a clinical judgment in these situations about whether the medical condition is causative, based on
temporal sequence as well as plausibility of a causal relationship. Finally, the condition may
remit before or just after the medical condition remits, particularly when treatment of the
manic/hypomanic symptoms is effective.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Culture-related differences, to the extent that there is any evidence, pertain to those associated
with the medical condition (e.g., rates of multiple sclerosis and stroke vary around the world
based on dietary factors, genetic factors, and other environmental factors).
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Gender differences pertain to those associated with the medical condition (e.g., systemic lupus
erythematosus is more common in females; stroke is somewhat more common in middle-age
males compared with females).
Diagnostic Markers
Diagnostic markers pertain to those associated with the medical condition (e.g., steroid levels in
