Delirium and major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
Symptoms of catatonia and acute anxiety.
Medication-induced depressive or manic symptoms.
blood or urine to help corroborate the diagnosis of Cushing’s disease, which can be associated
with manic or depressive syndromes; laboratory tests confirming the diagnosis of multiple
sclerosis).
Functional Consequences of Bipolar and Related Disorder Due to
Another Medical Condition
Functional consequences of the bipolar symptoms may exacerbate impairments associated with
the medical condition and may incur worse outcomes because of interference with medical
treatment.
Differential Diagnosis
A separate diagnosis of bipolar and related
disorder due to another medical condition is not given if the mood disturbance occurs exclusively
during the course of a delirium. However, a diagnosis of bipolar and related disorder due to
another medical condition may be given in addition to a diagnosis of major or mild
neurocognitive disorder if the mood disturbance is judged to be a physiological consequence of
the pathological process causing the neurocognitive disorder and if symptoms of irritability or
elevated mood are a prominent part of the clinical presentation.
168
It is important to differentiate symptoms of mania from
excited catatonic symptoms and from agitation related to acute anxiety states.
An important differential diagnostic observation
is that the other medical condition may be treated with medications (e.g., steroids or alpha-
interferon) that can induce depressive or manic symptoms. In these cases, clinical judgment
using all of the evidence in hand is the best way to try to separate the most likely and/or the most
important of two etiological factors (i.e., association with the medical condition vs. a
substance/medication-induced syndrome). The differential diagnosis of the associated medical
conditions is relevant but largely beyond the scope of the present manual.
Comorbidity
Conditions comorbid with bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition are
those associated with the medical conditions of etiological relevance. Delirium can occur before
or along with manic symptoms in individuals with Cushing’s disease.
Other Specified Bipolar and Related Disorder
F31.89
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a bipolar
and related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
