1. Feeling keyed up or tense.
2. Feeling unusually restless.
170
3. Difficulty concentrating because of worry.
4. Fear that something awful may happen.
5. Feeling that the individual might lose control of himself or herself.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Two symptoms.
Moderate: Three symptoms.
Moderate-severe: Four or five symptoms.
Severe: Four or five symptoms with motor agitation.
Note: Anxious distress has been noted as a prominent feature of both bipolar
and major depressive disorders in both primary care and specialty mental
health settings. High levels of anxiety have been associated with higher
suicide risk, longer duration of illness, and greater likelihood of treatment
nonresponse. As a result, it is clinically useful to specify accurately the
presence and severity levels of anxious distress for treatment planning and
monitoring of response to treatment.
With mixed features: The mixed features specifier can apply to the current
manic, hypomanic, or major depressive episode in bipolar I disorder (or the most
recent episode if bipolar I disorder is in partial or full remission) or to the current
hypomanic or major depressive episode in bipolar II disorder (or the most recent
episode if bipolar II disorder is in partial or full remission):
Manic or hypomanic episode, with mixed features:
A. Full criteria are met for a manic episode or hypomanic episode, and at least
three of the following symptoms are present during the majority of days of
the current or most recent episode of mania or hypomania:
1. Prominent dysphoria or depressed mood as indicated by either
subjective report (e.g., feels sad or empty) or observation made by
others (e.g., appears tearful).
2. Diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities (as
indicated by either subjective account or observation made by others).
3. Psychomotor retardation nearly every day (observable by others; not
merely subjective feelings of being slowed down).
4. Fatigue or loss of energy.
5. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (not merely
self-reproach or guilt about being sick).
6. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal
ideation without a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for
