committing suicide.
B. Mixed symptoms are observable by others and represent a change from the
person’s usual behavior.
C. For individuals whose symptoms meet full episode criteria for both mania
and depression simultaneously, the diagnosis should be manic episode,
with mixed features, due to the marked impairment and clinical severity of
full mania.
D. The mixed symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication or other treatment).
Depressive episode, with mixed features:
A. Full criteria are met for a major depressive episode, and at least three of the
following manic/hypomanic symptoms are present during the majority of
days of the current or most recent episode of depression:
1. Elevated, expansive mood.
2. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
171
3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
5. Increase in energy or goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or
school, or sexually).
6. Increased or excessive involvement in activities that have a high
potential for painful consequences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying
sprees, sexual indiscretions, or foolish business investments).
7. Decreased need for sleep (feeling rested despite sleeping less than
usual; to be contrasted with insomnia).
B. Mixed symptoms are observable by others and represent a change from the
person’s usual behavior.
C. For individuals whose symptoms meet full episode criteria for both mania
and depression simultaneously, the diagnosis should be manic episode,
with mixed features.
D. The mixed symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication or other treatment).
Note: Mixed features associated with a major depressive episode have been
found to be a significant risk factor for the development of bipolar I or bipolar II
disorder. As a result, it is clinically useful to note the presence of this specifier
for treatment planning and monitoring of response to treatment.
With rapid cycling: Presence of at least four mood episodes in the previous 12
months that meet the criteria for manic, hypomanic, or major depressive episode
in bipolar I disorder or that meet the criteria for hypomanic or major depressive
