episode in bipolar II disorder.
Note: Episodes are demarcated by either partial or full remissions of at least 2
months or a switch to an episode of the opposite polarity (e.g., major
depressive episode to manic episode).
Note: The essential feature of a rapid-cycling bipolar disorder is the
occurrence of at least four mood episodes during the previous 12 months.
These episodes can occur in any combination and order. The episodes must
meet both the duration and the symptom number criteria for a major
depressive, manic, or hypomanic episode and must be demarcated by either a
period of full remission or a switch to an episode of the opposite polarity.
Manic and hypomanic episodes are counted as being on the same pole.
Except for the fact that they occur more frequently, the episodes that occur in
a rapid-cycling pattern are no different from those that occur in a non-rapid-
cycling pattern. Mood episodes that count toward defining a rapid-cycling
pattern exclude those episodes directly caused by a substance (e.g., cocaine,
corticosteroids) or another medical condition.
With melancholic features:
A. One of the following is present during the most severe period of the current
major depressive episode (or the most recent major depressive episode if
bipolar I or bipolar II disorder is currently in partial or full remission):
1. Loss of pleasure in all, or almost all, activities.
2. Lack of reactivity to usually pleasurable stimuli (does not feel much better,
even temporarily, when something good happens).
B. Three (or more) of the following:
1. A distinct quality of depressed mood characterized by profound
despondency, despair, and/or moroseness or by so-called empty mood.
2. Depression that is regularly worse in the morning.
172
3. Early-morning awakening (i.e., at least 2 hours before usual awakening).
4. Marked psychomotor agitation or retardation.
5. Significant anorexia or weight loss.
6. Excessive or inappropriate guilt.
Note: The specifier “with melancholic features” is applied if these features
are present at the most severe stage of the episode. There is a near-
complete absence of the capacity for pleasure, not merely a diminution. A
guideline for evaluating the lack of reactivity of mood is that even highly
desired events are not associated with marked brightening of mood. Either
mood does not brighten at all, or it brightens only partially (e.g., up to 20%–
40% of normal for only minutes at a time). The “distinct quality” of mood
