173
hours at a time. Unlike the other atypical features, pathological sensitivity to
perceived interpersonal rejection is a trait that has an early onset and persists
throughout most of adult life. Rejection sensitivity occurs both when the person
is and is not depressed, though it may be exacerbated during depressive
periods.
With psychotic features: Delusions or hallucinations are present at any time in
the current manic or major depressive episode in bipolar I disorder (or the most
recent manic or major depressive episode if bipolar I disorder is currently in
partial or full remission) or in the current major depressive episode in bipolar II
disorder (or the most recent major depressive episode if bipolar II disorder is
currently in partial or full remission). If psychotic features are present, specify if
mood-congruent or mood-incongruent:
When applied to current or most recent manic episode (in bipolar I disorder):
With mood-congruent psychotic features: The content of all delusions
and hallucinations is consistent with the typical manic themes of grandiosity,
invulnerability, etc., but may also include themes of suspiciousness or
paranoia, especially with respect to others’ doubts about the individual’s
capacities, accomplishments, and so forth.
With mood-incongruent psychotic features: The content of the delusions
and hallucinations does not involve typical manic themes as described
above, or the content is a mixture of mood-incongruent and mood-congruent
themes.
When applied to current or most recent major depressive episode (in bipolar I
disorder or bipolar II disorder):
With mood-congruent psychotic features: The content of all delusions
and hallucinations is consistent with the typical depressive themes of
personal inadequacy, guilt, disease, death, nihilism, or deserved
punishment.
With mood-incongruent psychotic features: The content of the delusions
and hallucinations does not involve typical depressive themes of personal
inadequacy, guilt, disease, death, nihilism, or deserved punishment, or the
content is a mixture of mood-incongruent and mood-congruent themes.
With catatonia: This specifier is applied to the current manic or major
depressive episode in bipolar I disorder (or the most recent manic or major
depressive episode if bipolar I disorder is currently in partial or full remission)
or to the current major depressive episode in bipolar II disorder (or the most
recent major depressive episode if bipolar II disorder is currently in partial or
full remission) if catatonic features are present during most of the episode.
See criteria for catatonia associated with a mental disorder in the chapter
“Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders.”
