With peripartum onset: This specifier is applied to the current manic,
hypomanic, or major depressive episode in bipolar I disorder (or the most
recent manic, hypomanic, or major depressive episode if bipolar I disorder is
currently in partial or full remission) or to the current hypomanic or major
depressive episode in bipolar II disorder (or the most recent hypomanic or
major depressive episode if bipolar II disorder is currently in partial or full
remission) if onset of mood symptoms occurs during pregnancy or in the 4
weeks following delivery.
Note: Mood episodes can have their onset either during pregnancy or
postpartum. About 50% of postpartum major depressive episodes begin
prior to delivery. Thus, these episodes are referred to collectively as
peripartum episodes.
 Between conception and birth, about 9% of women will experience a
major depressive episode. The best estimate for prevalence of a major
depressive episode between birth and 12 months postpartum is just below
7%.
 Peripartum-onset mood episodes can present either with or without
psychotic features. Infanticide (a rare occurrence) is most often associated
with postpartum
174
psychotic episodes that are characterized by command hallucinations to kill
the infant or delusions that the infant is possessed, but psychotic symptoms
can also occur in severe postpartum mood episodes without such specific
delusions or hallucinations.
 Postpartum mood (major depressive or manic) episodes with psychotic
features appear to occur in from 1 in 500 to 1 in 1,000 deliveries and may be
more common in primiparous women. The risk of postpartum episodes with
psychotic features is particularly increased for women with prior postpartum
psychotic mood episodes but is also elevated for those with a prior history of
a depressive or bipolar disorder (especially bipolar I disorder) and those with
a family history of bipolar disorders.
 Once a woman has had a postpartum episode with psychotic features, the
risk of recurrence with each subsequent delivery is between 30% and 50%.
Postpartum episodes must be differentiated from delirium occurring in the
postpartum period, which is distinguished by a fluctuating level of
awareness or attention.
 Peripartum-onset depressive disorders must be distinguished from the
much more common “maternity blues,” or what is known in lay terms as
“baby blues.” Maternity blues is not considered to be a mental disorder and
is characterized by sudden changes in mood (e.g., the sudden onset of
tearfulness in the absence of depression) that do not cause functional
impairment and that are likely caused by physiological changes occurring
after delivery. It is temporary and self-limited, typically improving quickly
