(within a week) without the need for treatment. Other symptoms of maternity
blues include sleep disturbance and even confusion that can occur shortly
after delivery.
 Perinatal women may be at higher risk for depressive disorders due to
thyroid abnormalities as well as other medical conditions that can cause
depressive symptoms. If the depressive symptoms are judged to be due to
another medical condition related to the perinatal period, depressive
disorder due to another medical condition should be diagnosed instead of a
major depressive episode, with peripartum onset.
With seasonal pattern: This specifier applies to the lifetime pattern of mood
episodes. The essential feature is a regular seasonal pattern of at least one
type of episode (i.e., mania, hypomania, or depression). The other types of
episodes may not follow this pattern. For example, an individual may have
seasonal manias but have depressions that do not regularly occur at a specific
time of year.
A. There has been a regular temporal relationship between the onset of manic,
hypomanic, or major depressive episodes and a particular time of the year
(e.g., in the fall or winter) in bipolar I or bipolar II disorder.
Note: Do not include cases in which there is an obvious effect of seasonally
related psychosocial stressors (e.g., regularly being unemployed every
winter).
B. Full remissions (or a change from major depression to mania or hypomania
or vice versa) also occur at a characteristic time of the year (e.g.,
depression disappears in the spring).
C. In the last 2 years, the individual’s manic, hypomanic, or major depressive
episodes have demonstrated a temporal seasonal relationship, as defined
above, and no nonseasonal episodes of that polarity have occurred during
that 2-year period.
D. Seasonal manias, hypomanias, or depressions (as described above)
substantially outnumber any nonseasonal manias, hypomanias, or
depressions that may have occurred over the individual’s lifetime.
Note: The specifier “with seasonal pattern” can apply to the pattern of major
depressive episodes in bipolar I and bipolar II disorder, to the pattern of
manic episodes
175
and hypomanic episodes in bipolar I disorder, and to the pattern of
hypomanic episodes in bipolar II disorder. The essential feature is the onset
and remission of major depressive, manic, or hypomanic episodes at
characteristic times of the year. In most cases, the seasonal major
depressive episodes begin in fall or winter and remit in spring. Less
commonly, there may be recurrent summer depressive episodes. This
