pattern of onset and remission of episodes must have occurred during at
least a 2-year period, without any nonseasonal episodes occurring during
this period. In addition, the seasonal depressive, manic, or hypomanic
episodes must substantially outnumber any nonseasonal depressive, manic,
or hypomanic episodes over the individual’s lifetime.
 This specifier does not apply to those situations in which the pattern is
better explained by seasonally linked psychosocial stressors (e.g., seasonal
unemployment or school schedule). It is unclear whether a seasonal pattern
of major depressive episodes is more likely in recurrent major depressive
disorder or in bipolar disorders. However, within the bipolar disorders group,
a seasonal pattern of major depressive episodes appears to be more likely
in bipolar II disorder than in bipolar I disorder. In some individuals, the onset
of manic or hypomanic episodes may also be linked to a particular season,
with peak seasonality of mania or hypomania from spring through summer.
 The prevalence of winter-type seasonal pattern appears to vary with
latitude, age, and sex. Prevalence increases with higher latitudes. Age is
also a strong predictor of seasonality, with younger persons at higher risk for
winter depressive episodes.
Specify if:
In partial remission: Symptoms of the immediately previous manic, hypomanic,
or major depressive episode are present but full criteria are not met, or there is a
period lasting less than 2 months without any significant symptoms of a manic,
hypomanic, or major depressive episode following the end of such an episode.
In full remission: During the past 2 months, no significant signs or symptoms of
the disturbance were present.
Specify current severity of manic episode:
Severity is based on the number of criterion symptoms, the severity of those
symptoms, and the degree of functional disability.
Mild: Minimum symptom criteria are met for a manic episode.
Moderate: Very significant increase in activity or impairment in judgment.
Severe: Almost continual supervision is required in order to prevent physical
harm to self or others.
Specify current severity of major depressive episode:
Severity is based on the number of criterion symptoms, the severity of those
symptoms, and the degree of functional disability.
Mild: Few, if any, symptoms in excess of those required to make the diagnosis
are present, the intensity of the symptoms is distressing but manageable, and
the symptoms result in minor impairment in social or occupational functioning.
Moderate: The number of symptoms, intensity of symptoms, and/or functional
impairment are between those specified for “mild” and “severe.”
Severe: The number of symptoms is substantially in excess of that required to
make the diagnosis, the intensity of the symptoms is seriously distressing and
