Depressive Disorders
Depressive disorders include disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, major
depressive disorder (including major depressive episode), persistent depressive disorder,
premenstrual dysphoric disorder, substance/medication-induced depressive disorder, depressive
disorder due to another medical condition, other specified depressive disorder, and unspecified
depressive disorder. The common feature of all of these disorders is the presence of sad, empty,
or irritable mood, accompanied by related changes that significantly affect the individual’s
capacity to function (e.g., somatic and cognitive changes in major depressive disorder and
persistent depressive disorder). What differs among them are issues of duration, timing, or
presumed etiology.
In order to address concerns in the United States and, increasingly, internationally about the
potential for the overdiagnosis and treatment of bipolar disorder in children, a new diagnosis,
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, referring to the presentation of children with persistent
irritability and frequent episodes of extreme behavioral dyscontrol, is added to the depressive
disorders for children up to 12 years of age. Its placement in this chapter reflects the finding that
children with this symptom pattern typically develop unipolar depressive disorders or anxiety
disorders, rather than bipolar disorders, as they mature into adolescence and adulthood.
Major depressive disorder represents the classic condition in this group of disorders. It is
characterized by discrete episodes of at least 2 weeks’ duration (although most episodes last
considerably longer) involving clear-cut changes in affect, cognition, and neurovegetative
functions and interepisode remissions. A diagnosis based on a single episode is possible,
although the disorder is a recurrent one in the majority of cases. Careful consideration should be
given to the delineation of normal sadness and grief from a major depressive episode.
Bereavement may induce great suffering, but it does not typically induce an episode of major
depressive disorder. When they do occur together, the depressive symptoms and functional
impairment tend to be more severe and the prognosis is worse compared with bereavement that
is not accompanied by major depressive disorder. Bereavement-related major depressive
episodes tend to occur in persons with other vulnerabilities to depressive disorders.
A more chronic form of depression, persistent depressive disorder, can be diagnosed when
the mood disturbance continues for at least 2 years in adults or 1 year in children. This diagnosis,
new in DSM-5, includes the DSM-IV diagnostic categories of chronic major depression and
dysthymia.
After careful scientific review of the evidence, premenstrual dysphoric disorder has been
moved from an appendix of DSM-IV (“Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study”) to
Section II of DSM-5. Almost 20 years of additional research on this condition has confirmed a
specific and treatment-responsive form of depressive disorder that begins sometime following
ovulation and remits within a few days of menses and has a marked impact on functioning.
A large number of substances of abuse, some prescribed medications, and several medical
