F34.81
conditions can be associated with depression-like phenomena. This fact is recognized in the
diagnoses of substance/medication-induced depressive disorder and depressive disorder due to
another medical condition.
178
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Severe recurrent temper outbursts manifested verbally (e.g., verbal rages)
and/or behaviorally (e.g., physical aggression toward people or property) that are
grossly out of proportion in intensity or duration to the situation or provocation.
B. The temper outbursts are inconsistent with developmental level.
C. The temper outbursts occur, on average, three or more times per week.
D. The mood between temper outbursts is persistently irritable or angry most of the
day, nearly every day, and is observable by others (e.g., parents, teachers,
peers).
E. Criteria A–D have been present for 12 or more months. Throughout that time,
the individual has not had a period lasting 3 or more consecutive months without
all of the symptoms in Criteria A–D.
F. Criteria A and D are present in at least two of three settings (i.e., at home, at
school, with peers) and are severe in at least one of these.
G. The diagnosis should not be made for the first time before age 6 years or after
age 18 years.
H. By history or observation, the age at onset of Criteria A–E is before 10 years.
I. There has never been a distinct period lasting more than 1 day during which the
full symptom criteria, except duration, for a manic or hypomanic episode have
been met.
Note: Developmentally appropriate mood elevation, such as occurs in the
context of a highly positive event or its anticipation, should not be considered as
a symptom of mania or hypomania.
J. The behaviors do not occur exclusively during an episode of major depressive
disorder and are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., autism
spectrum disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, separation anxiety disorder,
persistent depressive disorder).
Note: This diagnosis cannot coexist with oppositional defiant disorder,
intermittent explosive disorder, or bipolar disorder, though it can coexist with
others, including major depressive disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder, conduct disorder, and substance use disorders. Individuals whose
symptoms meet criteria for both disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and
