oppositional defiant disorder should only be given the diagnosis of disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder. If an individual has ever experienced a manic or
hypomanic episode, the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
should not be assigned.
K. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or
another medical or neurological condition.
Diagnostic Features
The core feature of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is chronic severe, persistent
irritability. This severe irritability has two prominent clinical manifestations, the first of which is
frequent temper outbursts. These outbursts typically occur in response to frustration and can be
verbal or behavioral (the latter in the form of aggression against property, self, or others). They
must occur frequently (i.e., on average, three or more times per week) (Criterion C) over at least
1 year in at least two settings (Criteria E and F), such as in the home and at school, and they must
be developmentally inappropriate (Criterion B). The second manifestation of severe irritability
consists of chronic, persistently irritable or angry mood that is present between the severe temper
outbursts. This irritable or angry mood must be characteristic of the child, being present most of
the day, nearly every day, and noticeable by others in the child’s environment (Criterion D).
179
The clinical presentation of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder must be carefully
distinguished from presentations of other, related conditions, particularly pediatric bipolar
disorder. In fact, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder was added to DSM-5 to address the
considerable concern about the appropriate classification and treatment of children who present
with chronic, persistent irritability relative to children who present with classic (i.e., episodic)
bipolar disorder.
Some researchers view severe, nonepisodic irritability as characteristic of bipolar disorder in
children, although both DSM-IV and DSM-5 require that both children and adults have distinct
episodes of mania or hypomania to qualify for the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. During the
latter decades of the twentieth century, this contention by researchers that severe, nonepisodic
irritability is a manifestation of pediatric mania coincided with an upsurge in the rates at which
clinicians assigned the diagnosis of bipolar disorder to their pediatric patients. This sharp
increase in rates appears to be attributable to clinicians combining at least two clinical
presentations into a single category. That is, both classic, episodic presentations of mania and
nonepisodic presentations of severe irritability have been labeled as bipolar disorder in children.
In DSM-5, the term bipolar disorder is explicitly reserved for episodic presentations of bipolar
symptoms. DSM-IV did not include a diagnosis designed to capture youths whose hallmark
symptoms consisted of very severe, nonepisodic irritability, whereas DSM-5, with the inclusion
of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, provides a distinct category for such presentations.
Prevalence
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is common among children presenting to pediatric
