Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
mental health clinics. Prevalence estimates of the disorder in the community are unclear. In a
population-based cohort study of Brazilian 11-year-olds that used a specific module for
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, the prevalence was 2.5%.
Consistent gender differences in prevalence have not been reported in population samples,
although clinic samples report a male preponderance. For example, up to 80% of children
presenting to clinics in Turkey with features of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder in a chart
review were boys. Data suggest that the diagnosis may be more common in younger age groups
(e.g., 8.2% in a community sample of 6-year-olds in the United States).
Development and Course
The onset of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder must be before age 10 years, and the
diagnosis should not be applied to children with a developmental age of younger than 6 years. It
is unknown whether the condition presents only in this age-delimited fashion. Because the
symptoms of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are likely to change as children mature, use
of the diagnosis should be restricted to age groups similar to those in which validity has been
established (6–18 years). Approximately half of children with disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder living in a predominantly rural area in a large U.S. study continue to have symptoms
that meet criteria for the condition 1 year later, although those children whose symptoms no
longer meet the threshold for the diagnosis often have persistent, clinically impairing irritability.
Rates of conversion from severe, nonepisodic irritability to bipolar disorder are very low.
Instead, children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are at increased risk to develop
unipolar depressive and/or anxiety disorders in adulthood.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Children with chronic irritability typically exhibit complicated psychiatric
histories. In such children, a relatively extensive history of chronic irritability is common,
typically manifesting before full criteria for the syndrome are met. Such prediagnostic
presentations may have qualified for a diagnosis of oppositional defiant
180
disorder. Many children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder have symptoms that also
meet criteria for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and for an anxiety disorder,
with such diagnoses often being present from a relatively early age. For some children, the
criteria for major depressive disorder may also be met.
Factors associated with disrupted family life, such as psychological abuse or
neglect, parental psychiatric disorder, limited parental education, single-parent household, early
trauma, death of a parent, parental grief, divorce, and malnutrition (e.g., vitamin deficiency), are
associated with the core behaviors of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
Data suggest that a family history of depression may be a risk factor for
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Consistent with this, twin data suggest that the
association between early irritability and later unipolar depression and anxiety may be, in part,
genetically mediated.
Compared with children with pediatric bipolar disorder or other mental illnesses, those with
