disruptive mood dysregulation disorder exhibit both commonalities and differences in
information-processing deficits. For example, face-emotion labeling deficits, as well as perturbed
decision-making and cognitive control, are present in children with bipolar disorder as well as
those with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Importantly, however, the same behavioral
deficit may be associated with different patterns of neural dysfunction. There is also evidence for
disorder-specific dysfunction, such as during tasks assessing attention deployment in response to
emotional stimuli, which has demonstrated unique signs of dysfunction in children with chronic
irritability.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Culture-related data on disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are limited. However,
sociocultural factors affect the presentation of core psychological features of the disorder,
including impulsivity as well as emotion, reward, threat, and behavior dysregulation, especially
in settings characterized by severe social disruption, such as postconflict zones or communities
affected by long-standing racism and discrimination. It is important to distinguish disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder from adaptive responses to adversity that are context-dependent and
transitory.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
There is some evidence from twin studies that while irritability has a strong genetic component
in both sexes, patterns differ for boys and girls. For boys, genetic factors appear to account for an
increasing amount of the variance of the phenotype of irritability throughout childhood. While
genetic factors account for a large proportion of the variance of the irritability phenotype in
school-age girls, this decreases into adolescence and young adulthood, with environmental
influences playing a greater role. How this genetic risk for irritability translates into risk and
prognosis for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, per se, is not yet known.
Functional Consequences of Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder
Chronic, severe irritability, such as is seen in disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, is
associated with marked disruption in a child’s family and peer relationships, as well as in school
performance. Because of their extremely low frustration tolerance, such children generally have
difficulty succeeding in school; they are often unable to participate in the activities typically
enjoyed by healthy children; their family life is severely disrupted by their outbursts and
irritability; and they have trouble initiating or sustaining friendships. Levels of dysfunction in
children with bipolar disorder and disruptive mood
181
dysregulation disorder are generally comparable. Both conditions cause severe disruption in the
lives of the affected individual and his or her family. In both disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder and pediatric bipolar disorder, aggression and psychiatric hospitalization are common.
Differential Diagnosis
