Bipolar disorders.
Oppositional defiant disorder.
Because chronically irritable children and adolescents typically present with complex histories,
the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder must be made while considering the
presence or absence of multiple other conditions. Despite the need to consider many other
syndromes, differentiation of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder from bipolar disorder and
oppositional defiant disorder requires particularly careful assessment.
The central feature differentiating disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and
bipolar disorders in children involves the longitudinal course of the core symptoms. In children,
as in adults, bipolar I disorder and bipolar II disorder manifest as an episodic illness with discrete
episodes of mood perturbation that can be differentiated from the child’s typical presentation.
The mood perturbation that occurs during a manic episode is distinctly different from the child’s
usual mood. In addition, during a manic episode, the change in mood must be accompanied by
the onset, or worsening, of associated cognitive, behavioral, and physical symptoms (e.g.,
distractibility, increased goal-directed activity), which are also present to a degree that is
distinctly different from the child’s usual baseline. Thus, in the case of a manic episode, parents
(and, depending on developmental level, children) should be able to identify a distinct time
period during which the child’s mood and behavior were markedly different from usual. In
contrast, the irritability of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is persistent and is present
over many months; while it may wax and wane to a certain degree, severe irritability is
characteristic of the child with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Thus, while bipolar
disorders are episodic conditions, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is not. In fact, the
diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder cannot be assigned to a child who has ever
experienced a full-duration hypomanic or manic episode (irritable or euphoric) or who has ever
had a manic or hypomanic episode lasting more than 1 day. Another central differentiating
feature between bipolar disorders and disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is the presence of
elevated or expansive mood and grandiosity. These symptoms are common features of mania but
are not characteristic of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
While symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder typically do occur
in children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, mood symptoms of disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder are relatively rare in children with oppositional defiant disorder. The key
features that warrant the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder in children whose
symptoms also meet criteria for oppositional defiant disorder are the presence of severe and
frequently recurrent outbursts and a persistent disruption in mood between outbursts. In addition,
the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder requires severe impairment in at least
one setting (i.e., home, school, or among peers) and mild to moderate impairment in a second
setting. For this reason, while most children whose symptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder will also have a presentation that meets criteria for oppositional defiant
disorder, the reverse is not the case. That is, in only approximately 15% of individuals with
oppositional defiant disorder would criteria for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder be met.
Moreover, even for children in whom criteria for both disorders are met, only the diagnosis of
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder should be made. Finally, both the prominent mood
symptoms in disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and the high risk for depressive and anxiety
disorders in follow-up studies justify placement of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
among the depressive disorders in DSM-5. (Oppositional defiant disorder is included in the
chapter “Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct
