Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, major depressive disorder, anxiety disorders, and
autism spectrum disorder.
Intermittent explosive disorder.
182
Disorders.”) This reflects the more prominent mood component among individuals with
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, as compared with individuals with oppositional defiant
disorder. Nevertheless, it also should be noted that disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
appears to carry a high risk for behavioral problems as well as mood problems.
Unlike children diagnosed with bipolar disorder or oppositional defiant disorder—for whom a
diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder cannot be given even if the symptoms meet
diagnostic criteria for that disorder—children whose symptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder also can receive a comorbid diagnosis of ADHD, major depressive
disorder, and/or anxiety disorder. However, children whose irritability is present only in the
context of a major depressive episode or persistent depressive disorder should receive one of
those diagnoses rather than disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Children with disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder may have symptoms that also meet criteria for an anxiety disorder
and can receive both diagnoses, but children whose irritability is manifest only in the context of
exacerbation of an anxiety disorder should receive the relevant anxiety disorder diagnosis rather
than disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. In addition, children with autism spectrum
disorders frequently present with temper outbursts when, for example, their routines are
disturbed. In that instance, the temper outbursts would be considered secondary to the autism
spectrum disorder, and the child should not receive the diagnosis of disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder.
Children with symptoms suggestive of intermittent explosive
disorder present with instances of severe temper outbursts, much like children with disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder. However, unlike disruptive mood dysregulation disorder,
intermittent explosive disorder does not require the individual’s mood to be persistently irritable
or angry between outbursts. In addition, a diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder involving
verbal aggression or physical aggression that does not result in damage to property or physical
injury to animals or other individuals occurring at least twice weekly can be made after only 3
months of symptoms, in contrast to the 12-month requirement for disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder. Thus, these two diagnoses should not be made in the same child. For children with
outbursts and intercurrent, persistent irritability, only the diagnosis of disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder should be made.
Comorbidity
Rates of comorbidity in disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are extremely high. It is rare to
find individuals whose symptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder alone.
Comorbidity between disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and other DSM-defined
syndromes appears higher than for many other pediatric mental illnesses; the strongest overlap is
with oppositional defiant disorder. Not only is the overall rate of comorbidity high in disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder, but also the range of comorbid illnesses appears particularly
diverse. These children typically present to the clinic with a wide range of disruptive behavior,
mood, anxiety, and even autism spectrum symptoms and diagnoses. However, children with
