disruptive mood dysregulation disorder should not have symptoms that meet criteria for bipolar
disorder, as in that context, only the bipolar disorder diagnosis should be made. If children have
symptoms that meet criteria for oppositional defiant disorder or intermittent explosive disorder
and disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, only the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder should be assigned. Also, as noted earlier, the diagnosis of disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder should not be assigned if the symptoms occur only in an anxiety-
provoking context, when the routines of a child with autism spectrum disorder or obsessive-
compulsive disorder are disturbed, or in the context of a major depressive episode.
183
Major Depressive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during the same 2-
week period and represent a change from previous functioning; at least one of
the symptoms is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.
Note: Do not include symptoms that are clearly attributable to another medical
condition.
1. Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either
subjective report (e.g., feels sad, empty, hopeless) or observation made by
others (e.g., appears tearful). (Note: In children and adolescents, can be
irritable mood.)
2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most of
the day, nearly every day (as indicated by either subjective account or
observation).
3. Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of
more than 5% of body weight in a month), or decrease or increase in appetite
nearly every day. (Note: In children, consider failure to make expected weight
gain.)
4. Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
5. Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others,
not merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed down).
6. Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
7. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be
delusional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or guilt about being
sick).
8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day
(either by subjective account or as observed by others).
9. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ideation
