without a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for committing
suicide.
B. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or
another medical condition.
Note: Criteria A–C represent a major depressive episode.
Note: Responses to a significant loss (e.g., bereavement, financial ruin, losses
from a natural disaster, a serious medical illness or disability) may include the
feelings of intense sadness, rumination about the loss, insomnia, poor appetite,
and weight loss noted in Criterion A, which may resemble a depressive episode.
Although such symptoms may be understandable or considered appropriate to
the loss, the presence of a major depressive episode in addition to the normal
response to a significant loss should also be carefully considered. This decision
inevitably requires the exercise of clinical judgment based on the individual’s
history and the cultural norms for the expression of distress in the context of
loss.1
D. At least one major depressive episode is not better explained by schizoaffective
disorder and is not superimposed on schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder,
delusional disorder, or other specified and unspecified schizophrenia spectrum
and other psychotic disorders.
E. There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic episode.
Note: This exclusion does not apply if all of the manic-like or hypomanic-like
episodes are substance-induced or are attributable to the physiological effects of
another medical condition.
184
Coding and Recording Procedures
The diagnostic code for major depressive disorder is based on whether this is a
single or recurrent episode, current severity, presence of psychotic features, and
remission status. Current severity and psychotic features are only indicated if full
criteria are currently met for a major depressive episode. Remission specifiers are
only indicated if the full criteria are not currently met for a major depressive episode.
Codes are as follows:
Severity/course specifier
Single episode
Recurrent
episode*
Mild (p. 214)
F32.0
F33.0
Moderate (p. 214)
F32.1
F33.1
Severe (p. 214)
F32.2
F33.2
With psychotic features** (pp. 212–213)
F32.3
F33.3
In partial remission (p. 214)
F32.4
F33.41
