In full remission (p. 214)
F32.5
F33.42
Unspecified
F32.9
F33.9
*For an episode to be considered recurrent, there must be an interval of at least 2 consecutive months between
separate episodes in which criteria are not met for a major depressive episode. The definitions of specifiers are
found on the indicated pages.
**If psychotic features are present, code the “with psychotic features” specifier irrespective of episode severity.
In recording the name of a diagnosis, terms should be listed in the following order:
major depressive disorder, single or recurrent episode, severity/psychotic/remission
specifiers, followed by as many of the following specifiers without codes that apply to
the current episode (or the most recent episode if the major depressive disorder is in
partial or full remission). Note: The specifier “with seasonal pattern” describes the
pattern of recurrent major depressive episodes.
Specify if:
With anxious distress (pp. 210–211)
With mixed features (p. 211)
With melancholic features (pp. 211–212)
185
With atypical features (p. 212)
With mood-congruent psychotic features (p. 213)
With mood-incongruent psychotic features (p. 213)
With catatonia (p. 213). Coding note: Use additional code F06.1.
With peripartum onset (p. 213)
With seasonal pattern (applies to pattern of recurrent major depressive
episodes) (p. 214)
Diagnostic Features
Major depressive disorder is defined by the presence of at least one major depressive episode
occurring in the absence of a history of manic or hypomanic episodes. The essential feature of a
major depressive episode is a period lasting at least 2 weeks during which there is either
depressed mood or the loss of interest or pleasure in all or nearly all activities for most of the day
nearly every day (Criterion A). The individual must also experience at least four additional
symptoms during the same 2-week period, drawn from a list that includes changes in appetite or
weight, sleep, and psychomotor activity; decreased energy; feelings of worthlessness or guilt;
difficulty thinking, concentrating, or making decisions; or thoughts of death, suicidal ideation, a
suicide attempt, or a specific plan for suicidal behavior. To count toward a diagnosis of a major
depressive episode, a symptom must either be newly present or have clearly worsened compared
with the individual’s pre-episode status. Moreover, the symptoms must occur nearly every day,
for at least 2 consecutive weeks, with the exception of thoughts of death and suicidal ideation,
which must be recurrent, and attempting suicide or making a specific plan, which only needs to
