occur once. The episode must be accompanied by clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. For some individuals with milder
episodes, functioning may appear to be normal but requires markedly increased effort. The
presenting complaint is often insomnia or fatigue rather than depressed mood or loss of interest;
thus, the failure to probe for accompanying depressive symptoms can result in underdiagnosis.
Fatigue and sleep disturbance are present in a high proportion of cases; psychomotor
disturbances are much less common but are indicative of greater overall severity, as is the
presence of delusional or near-delusional guilt.
The mood in a major depressive episode is often described by the individual as depressed,
sad, hopeless, discouraged, or “down in the dumps” (Criterion A1). In some cases, sadness may
be denied at first but may subsequently be elicited by interview (e.g., by pointing out that the
individual looks as if he or she is about to cry). In some individuals who complain of feeling
“blah,” having no feelings, or feeling anxious, the presence of a depressed mood can be inferred
from the individual’s facial expression and demeanor. Some individuals emphasize somatic
complaints (e.g., bodily aches and pains) rather than reporting feelings of sadness. Many
individuals report or exhibit increased irritability (e.g., persistent anger, a tendency to respond to
events with angry outbursts or blaming others, an exaggerated sense of frustration over minor
matters). In children and adolescents, an irritable or cranky mood may develop rather than a sad
or dejected mood. This presentation should be differentiated from a pattern of irritability when
frustrated.
Diminished interest or pleasure in usual activities is nearly always present, at least to some
degree. Individuals may report feeling less interested in hobbies, “not caring anymore,” or not
feeling any enjoyment in activities that were previously considered pleasurable (Criterion A2).
Family members often notice social withdrawal or neglect of pleasurable avocations (e.g., a
formerly avid golfer no longer plays, a child who used to enjoy soccer finds excuses not to
practice). In some individuals, there is a significant reduction from previous levels of sexual
interest or desire.
186
Appetite change may involve either a reduction or an increase. Some depressed individuals
report that they have to force themselves to eat. Others may eat more and may crave specific
foods (e.g., sweets or other carbohydrates). When appetite changes are severe (in either
direction), there may be a significant loss or gain in weight, or, in children, a failure to make
expected weight gains may be noted (Criterion A3).
Sleep disturbance may take the form of either difficulty sleeping or sleeping excessively
(Criterion A4). When insomnia is present, it typically takes the form of middle insomnia (i.e.,
waking up during the night and then having difficulty returning to sleep) or terminal insomnia
(i.e., waking too early and being unable to return to sleep). Initial insomnia (i.e., difficulty falling
asleep) may also occur. Individuals who present with oversleeping (hypersomnia) may
experience prolonged sleep episodes at night or increased daytime sleep. Sometimes the reason
that the individual seeks treatment is for the disturbed sleep.
Psychomotor changes include agitation (e.g., the inability to sit still, pacing, hand-wringing;
or pulling or rubbing of the skin, clothing, or other objects) or retardation (e.g., slowed speech,
thinking, and body movements; increased pauses before answering; speech that is decreased in
