volume, inflection, amount, or variety of content, or muteness) (Criterion A5). The psychomotor
agitation or retardation must be severe enough to be observable by others and not represent
merely subjective feelings. Individuals who display either psychomotor disturbance (i.e.,
psychomotor agitation or retardation) are likely to have histories of the other.
Decreased energy, tiredness, and fatigue are common (Criterion A6). An individual may
report sustained fatigue without physical exertion. Even the smallest tasks seem to require
substantial effort. The efficiency with which tasks are accomplished may be reduced. For
example, an individual may complain that washing and dressing in the morning are exhausting
and take twice as long as usual. This symptom accounts for much of the impairment resulting
from major depressive disorder, both during acute episodes and when remission is incomplete.
The sense of worthlessness or guilt associated with a major depressive episode may include
unrealistic negative evaluations of one’s worth or guilty preoccupations or ruminations over
minor past failings (Criterion A7). Such individuals often misinterpret neutral or trivial day-to-
day events as evidence of personal defects and have an exaggerated sense of responsibility for
untoward events. The sense of worthlessness or guilt may be of delusional proportions (e.g., an
individual who is convinced that he or she is personally responsible for world poverty). Blaming
oneself for being sick and for failing to meet occupational or interpersonal responsibilities as a
result of the depression is very common and, unless delusional, is not considered sufficient to
meet this criterion.
Many individuals report impaired ability to think, concentrate, or make even minor decisions
(Criterion A8). They may appear easily distracted or complain of memory difficulties. Those
engaged in cognitively demanding pursuits are often unable to function. In children, a
precipitous drop in grades may reflect poor concentration. In elderly individuals, memory
difficulties may be the chief complaint and may be mistaken for early signs of a dementia
(“pseudodementia”). When the major depressive episode is successfully treated, the memory
problems often fully abate. However, in some individuals, particularly elderly persons, a major
depressive episode may sometimes be the initial presentation of an irreversible dementia.
Thoughts of death, suicidal ideation, or suicide attempts (Criterion A9) are common. They
may range from a passive wish not to awaken in the morning or a belief that others would be
better off if the individual were dead, to transient but recurrent thoughts of dying by suicide, to a
specific suicide plan. More severely suicidal individuals may have put their affairs in order (e.g.,
updated wills, settled debts), acquired needed materials (e.g., a rope or a gun), and chosen a
location and time to accomplish the suicide. Motivations for suicide may include a desire to give
up in the face of perceived insurmountable obstacles,
187
an intense wish to end what is perceived as an unending and excruciatingly painful emotional
state, an inability to foresee any enjoyment in life, or the wish to not be a burden to others. The
resolution of such thinking may be a more meaningful measure of diminished suicide risk than
denial of further plans for suicide.
The degree of impairment associated with a major depressive episode varies, but even in
milder cases, there must be either clinically significant distress or some interference in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion B). If impairment is severe, the
individual may lose the ability to function socially or occupationally. In extreme cases, the
