individual may be unable to perform minimal self-care (e.g., feeding and clothing self) or to
maintain minimal personal hygiene.
The individual’s report of symptoms may be compromised by difficulties in concentrating,
impaired memory, or a tendency to deny, discount, or explain away symptoms. Information from
additional informants can be especially helpful in clarifying the course of current or prior major
depressive episodes and in assessing whether there have been any manic or hypomanic episodes.
Because major depressive episodes can begin gradually, a review of clinical information that
focuses on the worst part of the current episode may be most likely to detect the presence of
symptoms.
The evaluation of the symptoms of a major depressive episode is especially difficult when
they occur in an individual who also has another medical condition (e.g., cancer, stroke,
myocardial infarction, diabetes, pregnancy). Some of the criterion signs and symptoms of a
major depressive episode are identical to those of another medical condition (e.g., weight loss
with untreated diabetes; fatigue with cancer; hypersomnia early in pregnancy; insomnia later in
pregnancy or the postpartum). Such symptoms count toward a major depressive diagnosis except
when they are clearly and fully attributable to another medical condition. Nonvegetative
symptoms of dysphoria, anhedonia, guilt or worthlessness, impaired concentration or indecision,
and suicidal thoughts should be assessed with particular care in such cases. Definitions of major
depressive episodes that have been modified to include only these nonvegetative symptoms
appear to identify nearly the same individuals as do the full criteria.
Associated Features
Major depressive disorder is associated with high mortality, much of which is accounted for by
suicide; however, it is not the only cause. For example, depressed individuals admitted to nursing
homes have a markedly increased likelihood of death in the first year. Individuals frequently
present with tearfulness, irritability, brooding, obsessive rumination, anxiety, phobias, excessive
worry over physical health, and complaints of pain (e.g., headaches; joint, abdominal, or other
pains). In children, separation anxiety may occur.
Although an extensive literature exists describing neuroanatomical, neuroendocrinological,
and neurophysiological correlates of major depressive disorder, no laboratory test has yielded
results of sufficient sensitivity and specificity to be used as a diagnostic tool for this disorder.
Until recently, hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis hyperactivity had been the most extensively
investigated abnormality associated with major depressive episodes, and it appears to be
associated with melancholia (a particularly severe type of depression), psychotic features, and
risks for eventual suicide. Molecular studies have also implicated peripheral factors, including
genetic variants in neurotrophic factors and pro-inflammatory cytokines. Additionally,
volumetric and functional magnetic resonance imaging studies provide evidence for
abnormalities in specific neural systems supporting emotion processing, reward seeking, and
emotion regulation in adults with major depression.
Prevalence
Twelve-month prevalence of major depressive disorder in the United States is approximately
7%, with marked differences by age group such that the prevalence in 18- to 29-year-old
