188
individuals is threefold higher than the prevalence in individuals age 60 years or older. The most
reproducible finding in the epidemiology of major depressive disorder has been a higher
prevalence in females, an effect that peaks in adolescence and then stabilizes. Women experience
approximately twofold higher rates than men, especially between menarche and menopause.
Women report more atypical symptoms of depression characterized by hypersomnia, increased
appetite, and leaden paralysis compared with men.
Systematic reviews show that the 12-month and point prevalence of major depressive
disorder vary eight- to ninefold across global geographic regions. In the United States,
prevalence increased from 2005 to 2015, with steeper rates of increase for youth compared with
older groups. After stratification by ethnoracial groups, non-Hispanic Whites showed a
significant increase in prevalence after adjustment for demographic characteristics, whereas no
significant change in rate of depression was observed among non-Hispanic Blacks or Hispanics.
Development and Course
Major depressive disorder may first appear at any age, but the likelihood of onset increases
markedly with puberty. In the United States, incidence appears to peak in the 20s; however, first
onset in late life is not uncommon.
The course of major depressive disorder is quite variable, such that some individuals rarely,
if ever, experience remission (a period of 2 or more months with no symptoms, or only one or
two symptoms to no more than a mild degree), while others experience many years with few or
no symptoms between discrete episodes. The course of depression may reflect social-structural
adversity associated with poverty, racism, and marginalization.
It is important to distinguish individuals who present for treatment during an exacerbation of
a chronic depressive illness from those whose symptoms developed recently. Chronicity of
depressive symptoms substantially increases the likelihood of underlying personality, anxiety,
and substance use disorders and decreases the likelihood that treatment will be followed by full
symptom resolution. It is therefore useful to ask individuals presenting with depressive
symptoms to identify the last period of at least 2 months during which they were entirely free of
depressive symptoms. Cases in which depressive symptoms are present for more days than not
might warrant an additional diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder.
Recovery from a major depressive episode begins within 3 months of onset for 40% of
individuals with major depression and within 1 year for 80% of individuals. Recency of onset is
a strong determinant of the likelihood of near-term recovery, and many individuals who have
been depressed for only several months can be expected to recover spontaneously. Features
associated with lower recovery rates, other than current episode duration, include psychotic
features, prominent anxiety, personality disorders, and symptom severity.
The risk of recurrence becomes progressively lower over time as the duration of remission
increases. The risk is higher in individuals whose preceding episode was severe, in younger
individuals, and in individuals who have already experienced multiple episodes. The persistence
of even mild depressive symptoms during remission is a powerful predictor of recurrence.
Many bipolar illnesses begin with one or more depressive episodes, and a substantial
proportion of individuals who initially appear to have major depressive disorder will prove, in
