Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Course modifiers.
time, to instead have a bipolar disorder. This is more likely in individuals with onset of the
illness in adolescence, those with psychotic features, and those with a family history of bipolar
illness. The presence of a “with mixed features” specifier also increases the risk for future manic
or hypomanic diagnosis. Major depressive disorder, particularly with psychotic features, may
also transition into schizophrenia, a change that is much more frequent than the reverse.
189
There are no clear effects of current age on the course or treatment response of major
depressive disorder. Some symptom differences exist, though, such that hypersomnia and
hyperphagia are more likely in younger individuals, and melancholic symptoms, particularly
psychomotor disturbances, are more common in older individuals. Depressions with earlier ages
at onset are more familial and more likely to involve personality disturbances. The course of
major depressive disorder within individuals does not generally change with aging. Mean times
to recovery do not change over multiple episodes, and the likelihood of being in an episode does
not generally increase or decrease with time.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Negative affectivity (neuroticism) is a well-established risk factor for the onset
of major depressive disorder, and high levels appear to render individuals more likely to develop
depressive episodes in response to stressful life events.
Adverse childhood experiences, particularly when they are multiple and of
diverse types, constitute a set of potent risk factors for major depressive disorder. Women may
be disproportionately at risk for adverse childhood experiences, including sexual abuse, that may
contribute to the increased prevalence of depression in this group. Other social determinants of
mental health, such as low income, limited formal education, racism, and other forms of
discrimination, are associated with higher risk of major depressive disorder. Stressful life events
are well recognized as precipitants of major depressive episodes, but the presence or absence of
adverse life events near the onset of episodes does not appear to provide a useful guide to
prognosis or treatment selection. Etiologically, women are disproportionately affected by major
risk factors for depression across the life span, including interpersonal trauma.
First-degree family members of individuals with major depressive
disorder have a risk for major depressive disorder two- to fourfold higher than that of the general
population. Relative risks appear to be higher for early-onset and recurrent forms. Heritability is
approximately 40%, and the personality trait neuroticism accounts for a substantial portion of
this genetic liability.
Women may also be at risk for depressive disorders in relation to specific reproductive life
stages, including in the premenstrual period, postpartum, and in perimenopause.
Essentially all major nonmood disorders (i.e., anxiety, substance use, trauma-
and stressor-related, feeding and eating, and obsessive-compulsive and related disorders)
increase the risk of an individual developing depression. Major depressive episodes that develop
against the background of another disorder often follow a more refractory course. Substance use,
anxiety, and borderline personality disorders are among the most common of these, and the
presenting depressive symptoms may obscure and delay their recognition. However, sustained
