clinical improvement in depressive symptoms may depend on the appropriate treatment of
underlying illnesses. Chronic or disabling medical conditions also increase risks for major
depressive episodes. Prevalent illnesses such as diabetes, morbid obesity, and cardiovascular
disease are often complicated by depressive episodes, and these episodes are more likely to
become chronic than are depressive episodes in medically healthy individuals.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Although there is substantial cross-cultural variation in the prevalence, course, and
symptomatology of depression, a syndrome similar to major depressive disorder can be
identified across diverse cultural contexts. Symptoms commonly associated with depression
across cultural contexts, not listed in the DSM criteria, include social isolation or loneliness,
anger, crying, and diffuse pain. A wide range of other somatic complaints are
190
common and vary by cultural context. Understanding the significance of these symptoms
requires exploring their meaning in local social contexts.
Symptoms of major depressive disorder may be underdetected or underreported, potentially
leading to misdiagnosis, including overdiagnosis of schizophrenia spectrum disorders in some
ethnic and racialized groups facing discrimination. Cross-nationally, higher levels of income
inequality in a society are associated with higher prevalence of major depressive disorder. In the
United States, the chronicity of major depressive disorder appears to be higher among African
Americans and Caribbean Blacks compared with non-Latinx Whites, possibly because of the
impact of racism, discrimination, greater sociostructural adversity, and lack of access to quality
mental health care.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
There are no clear differences between genders in treatment response or functional
consequences. There is some evidence for sex and gender differences in phenomenology and
course of illness. Women tend to experience more disturbances in appetite and sleep, including
atypical features such as hyperphagia and hypersomnia, and are more likely to experience
interpersonal sensitivity and gastrointestinal symptoms. Men with depression, however, may be
more likely than depressed women to report greater frequencies and intensities of maladaptive
self-coping and problem-solving strategies, including alcohol or other drug misuse, risk taking,
and poor impulse control.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Age-adjusted rates of suicide in the United States have increased from 10.5 to 14.0 per 100,000
over the past two decades. An earlier review of the literature indicated that individuals with
depressive illness have a 17-fold increased risk for suicide over the age- and sex-adjusted general
population rate. The likelihood of suicide attempts lessens in middle and late life, although the
risk of death by suicide does not. The possibility of suicidal behavior exists at all times during
major depressive episodes. The most consistently described risk factor is a past history of suicide
attempts or threats, but it should be remembered that most deaths by suicide are not preceded by
