Manic episodes with irritable mood or with mixed features.
Bipolar I disorder, bipolar II disorder, or other specified bipolar and related disorder.
Depressive disorder due to another medical condition.
nonfatal attempts. Anhedonia has a particularly strong association with suicidal ideation. Other
features associated with an increased risk for death by suicide include being single, living alone,
social disconnectedness, early life adversity, availability of lethal methods such as a firearm,
sleep disturbance, cognitive and decision-making deficits, and having prominent feelings of
hopelessness. Women attempt suicide at a higher rate than men, while men are more likely to
complete suicide. The difference in suicide rate between men and women with depressive
disorders is smaller than in the population as a whole, however. Comorbidities, including
aggressive-impulsive traits, borderline personality disorder, substance use disorder, anxiety,
other medical conditions, and functional impairment, increase risk for future suicidal behavior.
Functional Consequences of Major Depressive Disorder
Many of the functional consequences of major depressive disorder derive from individual
symptoms. Impairment can be very mild, such that many of those who interact with the affected
individual are unaware of depressive symptoms. Impairment may, however, range to complete
incapacity such that the depressed individual is unable to attend to basic self-care needs or is
mute or catatonic. For individuals seen in general medical settings, those with major depressive
disorder have more pain and physical illness and greater decreases in physical, social, and role
functioning. Depressed women report greater functional impairment in their relationships than
men.
191
Differential Diagnosis
Major depressive episodes with prominent
irritable mood may be difficult to distinguish from manic episodes with irritable mood or with
mixed features. This distinction requires a careful clinical evaluation of the presence of sufficient
manic symptoms to meet threshold criteria (i.e., three if mood is manic, four if mood is irritable
but not manic).
Major 
depressive
episodes along with a history of a manic or hypomanic episode preclude the diagnosis of major
depressive disorder. Major depressive episodes with a history of hypomanic episodes and
without a history of manic episodes indicate a diagnosis of bipolar II disorder, whereas major
depressive episodes with a history of manic episodes (with or without hypomanic episodes)
indicate a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. On the other hand, presentations of major depressive
episodes with a history of periods of hypomania that do not meet criteria for a hypomanic
episode may be diagnosed as either other specified bipolar and related disorder or major
depressive disorder depending on where the clinician judges the presentation to best fall. For
example, the presentation may be best considered other specified bipolar and related disorder
because of the clinical significance of the subthreshold hypomanic symptoms, or the presentation
may be best considered a case of major depressive disorder with some subthreshold hypomanic
symptoms in between episodes.
A diagnosis of depressive disorder due to
another medical condition requires the presence of an etiological medical condition. Major
