Substance/medication-induced depressive disorder.
Persistent depressive disorder.
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
Major 
depressive 
episodes 
superimposed 
on 
schizophrenia, 
delusional 
disorder,
schizophreniform disorder, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other
psychotic disorder.
Schizoaffective disorder.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Adjustment disorder with depressed mood.
depressive disorder is not diagnosed if the major depressive–like episodes are all attributable to
the direct pathophysiological consequence of a specific medical condition (e.g., multiple
sclerosis, stroke, hypothyroidism).
This disorder is distinguished from major
depressive disorder by the fact that a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, a toxin)
appears to be etiologically related to the mood disturbance. For example, depressed mood that
occurs only in the context of withdrawal from cocaine would be diagnosed as cocaine-induced
depressive disorder.
Persistent depressive disorder is characterized by depressed mood,
more days than not, for at least 2 years. If criteria are met for both major depressive disorder and
persistent depressive disorder, both can be diagnosed.
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder is characterized by dysphoric
mood that is present in the final week before the onset of menses, that starts to improve within a
few days after the onset of menses, and that becomes minimal or absent in the week postmenses.
By contrast, the episodes of major depressive disorder are not temporally connected to the
menstrual cycle.
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is characterized by
severe, recurrent temper outbursts manifested verbally and/or behaviorally, accompanied by
persistent or labile mood, most of the day, nearly every day, in between the outbursts. In
contrast, in major depressive disorder, irritability is confined to the major depressive episodes.
Depressive 
symptoms 
may 
be 
present 
during 
schizophrenia, 
delusional 
disorder,
schizophreniform disorder, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other
psychotic disorder. Most commonly, such depressive symptoms can be considered associated
features of these disorders and do not merit a
192
separate diagnosis. However, when the depressive symptoms meet full criteria for a major
depressive episode, a diagnosis of other specified depressive disorder may be made in addition to
the diagnosis of the psychotic disorder.
Schizoaffective disorder differs from major depressive disorder, with
psychotic features, by the requirement that in schizoaffective disorder, delusions or
hallucinations are present for at least 2 weeks in the absence of a major depressive episode.
Distractibility and low frustration tolerance can occur in
both attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and a major depressive episode; if the
criteria are met for both, ADHD may be diagnosed in addition to the mood disorder. However,
the clinician must be cautious not to overdiagnose a major depressive episode in children with
ADHD whose disturbance in mood is characterized by irritability rather than by sadness or loss
of interest.
A major depressive episode that occurs in response to a
psychosocial stressor is distinguished from adjustment disorder, with depressed mood, by the
