Bereavement.
Sadness.
F34.1
fact that the full criteria for a major depressive episode are not met in adjustment disorder.
Bereavement is the experience of losing a loved one to death. It generally triggers
a grief response that may be intense and may involve many features that overlap with symptoms
characteristic of a major depressive episode, such as sadness, difficulty sleeping, and poor
concentration. Features that help differentiate a bereavement-related grief response from a major
depressive episode include the following: the predominant affects in grief are feelings of
emptiness and loss, whereas in a major depressive episode they are persistent depressed mood
and a diminished ability to experience pleasure. Moreover, the dysphoric mood of grief is likely
to decrease in intensity over days to weeks and occurs in waves that tend to be associated with
thoughts or reminders of the deceased, whereas the depressed mood in a major depressive
episode is more persistent and not tied to specific thoughts or preoccupations. It is important to
note that in a vulnerable individual (e.g., someone with a past history of major depressive
disorder), bereavement may trigger not only a grief response but also the development of an
episode of depression or the worsening of an existing episode.
Finally, periods of sadness are inherent aspects of the human experience. These
periods should not be diagnosed as a major depressive episode unless criteria are met for severity
(i.e., five out of nine symptoms), duration (i.e., most of the day, nearly every day for at least 2
weeks), and clinically significant distress or impairment. The diagnosis other specified
depressive disorder may be appropriate for presentations of depressed mood with clinically
significant impairment that do not meet criteria for duration or severity.
Comorbidity
Other disorders with which major depressive disorder frequently co-occurs are substance-related
disorders, panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, obsessive-
compulsive disorder, anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and borderline personality disorder.
While women are more likely than men to report comorbid anxiety disorders, bulimia
nervosa, and somatoform disorder (somatic symptom and related disorders), men are more likely
to report comorbid alcohol and substance abuse.
193
Persistent Depressive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
This disorder represents a consolidation of DSM-IV-defined chronic major
depressive disorder and dysthymic disorder.
A. Depressed mood for most of the day, for more days than not, as indicated by
either subjective account or observation by others, for at least 2 years.
Note: In children and adolescents, mood can be irritable and duration must be at
least 1 year.
B. Presence, while depressed, of two (or more) of the following:
