1. Poor appetite or overeating.
2. Insomnia or hypersomnia.
3. Low energy or fatigue.
4. Low self-esteem.
5. Poor concentration or difficulty making decisions.
6. Feelings of hopelessness.
C. During the 2-year period (1 year for children or adolescents) of the disturbance,
the individual has never been without the symptoms in Criteria A and B for more
than 2 months at a time.
D. Criteria for a major depressive disorder may be continuously present for 2 years.
E. There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic episode.
F. The disturbance is not better explained by a persistent schizoaffective disorder,
schizophrenia, 
delusional 
disorder, 
or 
other 
specified 
or 
unspecified
schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.
G. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g.,
hypothyroidism).
H. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Note: If criteria are sufficient for a diagnosis of a major depressive episode at any
time during the 2-year period of depressed mood, then a separate diagnosis of major
depression should be made in addition to the diagnosis of persistent depressive
disorder along with the relevant specifier (e.g., with intermittent major depressive
episodes, with current episode).
Specify if:
With anxious distress (pp. 210–211)
With atypical features (p. 212)
Specify if:
In partial remission (p. 214)
In full remission (p. 214)
Specify if:
Early onset: If onset is before age 21 years.
Late onset: If onset is at age 21 years or older.
Specify if (for most recent 2 years of persistent depressive disorder):
With pure dysthymic syndrome: Full criteria for a major depressive episode
have not been met in at least the preceding 2 years.
With persistent major depressive episode: Full criteria for a major depressive
episode have been met throughout the preceding 2-year period.
194
