With intermittent major depressive episodes, with current episode: Full
criteria for a major depressive episode are currently met, but there have been
periods of at least 8 weeks in at least the preceding 2 years with symptoms
below the threshold for a full major depressive episode.
With intermittent major depressive episodes, without current episode: Full
criteria for a major depressive episode are not currently met, but there has been
one or more major depressive episodes in at least the preceding 2 years.
Specify current severity:
Mild (p. 214)
Moderate (p. 214)
Severe (p. 214)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of persistent depressive disorder is a depressed mood that occurs for most
of the day, for more days than not, for at least 2 years, or at least 1 year for children and
adolescents (Criterion A). This disorder represents a consolidation of DSM-IV-defined chronic
major depressive disorder and dysthymic disorder. Major depression may precede persistent
depressive disorder, and major depressive episodes may occur during persistent depressive
disorder. Individuals whose symptoms meet major depressive disorder criteria for 2 years should
be given a diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder as well as major depressive disorder.
Individuals with persistent depressive disorder describe their mood as sad or “down in the
dumps.” During periods of depressed mood, at least two of the six symptoms from Criterion B
are present. Because these symptoms have become a part of the individual’s day-to-day
experience, particularly in the case of early onset (e.g., “I’ve always been this way”), they may
not be reported unless the individual is directly prompted. During the 2-year period (1 year for
children or adolescents), any symptom-free intervals that have occurred have lasted no longer
than 2 months (Criterion C).
Prevalence
Persistent depressive disorder is effectively an amalgam of DSM-IV dysthymic disorder and
chronic major depressive episode. The 12-month prevalence in the United States is
approximately 0.5% for dysthymic disorder and 1.5% for chronic major depressive disorder,
with prevalence among women approximately 1.5 and 2 times higher than prevalence among
men for each of these diagnoses, respectively. Based on studies using comparable ascertainment
procedures, the lifetime and 12-month estimates of DSM-IV dysthymia may be higher in high-
income than in low- and middle-income countries. However, the disorder is associated with
elevated risk of suicidal outcomes and comparable levels of disability wherever it occurs.
Development and Course
Persistent depressive disorder often has an early and insidious onset (i.e., in childhood,
adolescence, or early adult life) and, by definition, a chronic course. Borderline personality
disorder is a particularly robust risk factor for persistent depressive disorder. When persistent
