Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
depressive disorder and borderline personality disorder coexist, the covariance of the
corresponding features over time suggests the operation of a common mechanism. Early onset
(i.e., before age 21 years) is associated with a higher likelihood of comorbid personality
disorders and substance use disorders.
When symptoms rise to the level of a major depressive episode, they are likely to
subsequently revert to a lower level. However, depressive symptoms are much less likely to
resolve fully in a given period of time in the context of persistent depressive disorder than they
are in a nonchronic major depressive episode.
195
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Factors predictive of poorer long-term outcome include higher levels of negative
affectivity (neuroticism), greater symptom severity, poorer global functioning, and presence of
anxiety disorders or conduct disorder.
Childhood risk factors include parental loss or separation and childhood
adversity.
There are no clear differences in illness development, course, or family
history between DSM-IV dysthymic disorder and chronic major depressive disorder. Earlier
findings pertaining to either disorder are therefore likely to apply to persistent depressive
disorder. It is thus likely that individuals with persistent depressive disorder will have a higher
proportion of first-degree relatives with persistent depressive disorder than do individuals with
nonchronic major depressive disorder, and more depressive disorders in general.
A number of brain regions (e.g., prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate, amygdala,
hippocampus) 
have 
been 
implicated 
in 
persistent 
depressive 
disorder. 
Possible
polysomnographic abnormalities exist as well.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The perceived abnormality or tolerance of chronic depressive symptoms may vary across
cultures, affecting symptom detection and treatment acceptability. For example, some social
groups or age cohorts may consider long-standing depressive symptoms to be normal reactions
to adversity.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Persistent depressive disorder is associated with elevated risk of suicidal outcomes and
comparable levels of disability, whether the disorder occurs in high-, middle-, or low-income
countries.
Functional Consequences of Persistent Depressive Disorder
The degree to which persistent depressive disorder impacts social and occupational functioning
is likely to vary widely, but effects can be as great as or greater than those of major depressive
disorder.
