Major depressive disorder.
Other specified depressive disorder.
Bipolar I and bipolar II disorders.
Cyclothymic disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
If there is a depressed mood for more days than not plus two or more
persistent depressive disorder Criterion B symptoms for 2 years or more, then the diagnosis of
persistent depressive disorder is made. If the symptom criteria are sufficient for a diagnosis of a
major depressive episode at any time during this period, then the additional diagnosis of major
depression should be made. The comorbid presence of major depressive episodes during this
period should also be noted by assigning the appropriate course specifier to the persistent
depressive disorder diagnosis as follows: If the individual’s symptoms currently meet full criteria
for a major depressive episode, and there have been periods of at least 8 weeks in at least the
preceding 2 years with symptoms below the threshold for a full major depressive episode, then
the specifier “with intermittent major depressive episodes, with current episode” would be
assigned. If full criteria for a major depressive episode are not currently met but there has been
one or more major depressive episodes in at least the preceding 2 years, then the specifier “with
intermittent major depressive episodes, without current episode” is assigned. If a major
depressive episode
196
has persisted for at least a 2-year duration and remains present, then the specifier “with persistent
major depressive episode” is used. If the individual has not experienced an episode of major
depression in the last 2 years, then the specifier “with pure dysthymic syndrome” is used.
Because the criteria for a major depressive episode include
symptoms (i.e., markedly diminished interest or pleasure in activities; psychomotor agitation or
retardation; recurrent thoughts of death, suicidal ideation, suicide attempt or plan) that are absent
from the symptom list for persistent depressive disorder (i.e., depressed mood and two out of six
Criterion B symptoms), a very limited number of individuals will have depressive symptoms that
have persisted longer than 2 years but that do not meet criteria for persistent depressive disorder.
If full criteria for a major depressive episode have been met at some point during the current
episode of illness, a diagnosis of major depressive disorder would apply. Otherwise, a diagnosis
of other specified depressive disorder or unspecified depressive disorder should be given.
A history of a manic or hypomanic episode precludes the
diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder. A history of manic episodes (with or without
hypomanic episodes) indicates a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. A history of hypomanic episodes
(without any history of manic episodes in individuals with persistent depressive presentations
during which criteria have been met for a major depressive episode) warrants a diagnosis of
bipolar II disorder. Other specified bipolar disorder applies to individuals whose presentations
include a history of hypomanic episodes along with persistent depressive presentation that has
never met full criteria for a major depressive episode.
A diagnosis of cyclothymic disorder precludes the diagnosis of persistent
depressive disorder. Thus, if during the period lasting at least 2 years of depressed mood for most
of the day, for more days than not, 1) there are numerous periods with hypomanic symptoms that
do not meet criteria for a hypomanic episode, 2) there have not been any symptom-free periods
of more than 2 months at a time, and 3) criteria have never been met for a major depressive,
manic, or hypomanic episode, then the diag-nosis would be cyclothymic disorder instead of
