Psychotic disorders.
Depressive or bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition.
Substance/medication-induced depressive or bipolar and related disorder.
Personality disorders.
F32.81
persistent depressive disorder.
Depressive symptoms are a common associated feature of chronic psychotic
disorders (e.g., schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, delusional disorder). A separate
diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder is not made if the symptoms occur only during the
course of the psychotic disorder (including residual phases).
Persistent 
depressive
disorder must be distinguished from a depressive or bipolar and related disorder due to another
medical condition. The diagnosis is depressive or bipolar and related disorder due to another
medical condition if the mood disturbance is judged, based on history, physical examination, or
laboratory findings, to be attributable to the direct pathophysiological effects of a specific,
usually chronic, medical condition (e.g., multiple sclerosis). If it is judged that the depressive
symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of another medical condition, then the
primary mental disorder (e.g., persistent depressive disorder) is recorded, and the medical
condition is noted as a concomitant medical condition (e.g., diabetes mellitus).
A 
substance/medication-
induced depressive or bipolar and related disorder is distinguished from persistent depressive
disorder when a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, a toxin) is judged to be
etiologically related to the mood disturbance.
A personality disorder is characterized by an enduring pattern of inner
experience and behavior that deviates markedly from the expectations of the
197
individual’s culture, with onset by adolescence or early adulthood. Personality disorders
commonly co-occur with persistent depressive disorder. If criteria are met for persistent
depressive disorder and a personality disorder, both may be diagnosed.
Comorbidity
In comparison to individuals with major depressive disorder, those with persistent depressive
disorder are at higher risk for psychiatric comorbidity in general, and for anxiety disorders,
substance use disorders, and personality disorders in particular. Early-onset persistent depressive
disorder is strongly associated with DSM-5 Cluster B and C personality disorders.
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. In the majority of menstrual cycles, at least five symptoms must be present in the
final week before the onset of menses, start to improve within a few days after
the onset of menses, and become minimal or absent in the week postmenses.
B. One (or more) of the following symptoms must be present:
