1. Marked affective lability (e.g., mood swings; feeling suddenly sad or tearful, or
increased sensitivity to rejection).
2. Marked irritability or anger or increased interpersonal conflicts.
3. Marked depressed mood, feelings of hopelessness, or self-deprecating
thoughts.
4. Marked anxiety, tension, and/or feelings of being keyed up or on edge.
C. One (or more) of the following symptoms must additionally be present, to reach a
total of five symptoms when combined with symptoms from Criterion B above.
1. Decreased interest in usual activities (e.g., work, school, friends, hobbies).
2. Subjective difficulty in concentration.
3. Lethargy, easy fatigability, or marked lack of energy.
4. Marked change in appetite; overeating; or specific food cravings.
5. Hypersomnia or insomnia.
6. A sense of being overwhelmed or out of control.
7. Physical symptoms such as breast tenderness or swelling, joint or muscle
pain, a sensation of “bloating,” or weight gain.
Note: The symptoms in Criteria A–C must have been met for most menstrual
cycles that occurred in the preceding year.
D. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or interference with work,
school, usual social activities, or relationships with others (e.g., avoidance of
social activities; decreased productivity and efficiency at work, school, or home).
E. The disturbance is not merely an exacerbation of the symptoms of another
disorder, such as major depressive disorder, panic disorder, persistent
depressive disorder, or a personality disorder (although it may co-occur with any
of these disorders).
F. Criterion A should be confirmed by prospective daily ratings during at least two
symptomatic cycles. (Note: The diagnosis may be made provisionally prior to
this confirmation.)
G. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, other treatment) or another medical
condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).
198
Recording Procedures
If symptoms have not been confirmed by prospective daily ratings of at least two symptomatic
cycles, “provisional” should be noted after the name of the diagnosis (i.e., “premenstrual
dysphoric disorder, provisional”).
Diagnostic Features
