The essential features of premenstrual dysphoric disorder are the expression of mood lability,
irritability, dysphoria, and anxiety symptoms that occur repeatedly during the premenstrual phase
of the cycle and remit around the onset of menses or shortly thereafter. These symptoms may be
accompanied by behavioral and physical symptoms. Symptoms must have occurred in most of
the menstrual cycles during the past year and must have an adverse effect on work or social
functioning. The intensity and/or expressivity of the accompanying symptoms may be closely
related to social and cultural background characteristics as well as religious beliefs, social
tolerance, attitude toward the female reproductive cycle, and female gender role issues more
generally.
Typically, symptoms peak around the time of the onset of menses. Although it is not
uncommon for symptoms to linger into the first few days of menses, the individual must have a
symptom-free period in the follicular phase after the menstrual period begins. While the core
symptoms include mood and anxiety symptoms, behavioral and somatic symptoms commonly
also occur. However, the presence of somatic and/or behavioral symptoms in the absence of
mood and/or anxious symptoms is not sufficient for a diagnosis. Symptoms are of comparable
severity (but not duration) to those of other mental disorders, such as a major depressive episode
or generalized anxiety disorder. In order to confirm a provisional diagnosis, daily prospective
symptom ratings are required for at least two symptomatic cycles.
Symptoms must cause clinically significant distress and/or an obvious and marked
impairment in the ability to function socially or occupationally in the week prior to menses.
Associated Features
Delusions and hallucinations have been described in the late luteal phase of the menstrual cycle
but are rare.
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence of premenstrual dysphoric disorder in the community has been
estimated at 5.8% based on a large study from Germany. Another study that looked at prevalence
over two menstrual cycles found 1.3% of menstruating women with the disorder in the United
States. Estimates based on retrospective reports are often higher than those based on prospective
daily ratings. Yet, estimates based on a daily record of symptoms for 1–2 months may not be
fully representative, because those with the most severe symptoms may be unable to sustain the
rating process. The most rigorous estimate of premenstrual dysphoric disorder prevalence in the
United States using prospective ratings of two consecutive menstrual cycles was 1.3% for
women whose symptoms met diagnostic criteria, who experienced functional impairment, and
had no co-occurring mental disorder. The prevalence of premenstrual dysphoric disorder
symptoms in adolescent girls may be higher than that observed in adult women.
Development and Course
Onset of premenstrual dysphoric disorder can occur at any point after menarche. Incidence of
new cases over a 40-month follow-up period in Germany is 2.5% (95% confidence interval =
1.7–3.7). Symptoms cease after menopause, although cyclical hormone replacement can trigger
the re-expression of symptoms.
