Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Premenstrual syndrome.
199
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental factors associated with the expression of premenstrual dysphoric
disorder include stress, history of interpersonal trauma, seasonal changes, and sociocultural
aspects of female sexual behavior in general, and female gender roles in particular.
No studies have examined heritability in premenstrual dysphoric
disorder specifically. Estimates for heritability of premenstrual dysphoric symptoms range
between 30% and 80%, although it remains unclear whether the symptoms themselves are
heritable or whether they are simply associated with other heritable factors or traits.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder has been observed in individuals in the United States, Europe,
India, Nigeria, Brazil, and Asia, with a broad prevalence range. Nevertheless, as with most
mental disorders, frequency, intensity, and expressivity of symptoms; perceived consequences;
help-seeking patterns; and management may be significantly influenced by social and cultural
factors, such as a history of sexual abuse or domestic violence, limited social support, and
cultural variations in attitudes toward menstruation.
Diagnostic Markers
As indicated earlier, the diagnosis of premenstrual dysphoric disorder is appropriately confirmed
by 2 months of prospective symptom ratings. A number of scales, including the Daily Rating of
Severity of Problems and the Visual Analogue Scales for Premenstrual Mood Symptoms, have
undergone validation and are commonly used in clinical trials for premenstrual dysphoric
disorder. The Premenstrual Tension Syndrome Rating Scale has a self-report and an observer
version, both of which have been validated and used widely to measure illness severity in women
who have premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
The premenstrual phase has been considered by some to be a risk period for suicide.
Functional Consequences of Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder
Impairment in social functioning may be manifested by discord in the intimate partner
relationship and problems with children, other family members, or friends that occur only in
association with the premenstrual dysphoric disorder (i.e., as opposed to chronic interpersonal
problems). Impairments in work and health-related quality of life are also prominent. There is
evidence that premenstrual dysphoric disorder can be associated with impairments in function
and health-related quality of life that are on par with those observed in major depressive disorder
and persistent depressive disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Premenstrual syndrome differs from premenstrual dysphoric disorder in
