Dysmenorrhea.
Bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder, and persistent depressive disorder.
Use of hormonal treatments.
Other medical conditions.
that premenstrual syndrome does not require a minimum of five symptoms nor mood-related
symptomatology, and it is generally considered to be less severe than premenstrual dysphoric
disorder. Premenstrual syndrome may be more common than premenstrual dysphoric disorder;
its estimated prevalence varies with numbers that hover at about 20%. While premenstrual
syndrome shares the feature of symptom expression during the premenstrual phase of the
menstrual cycle, the presence of somatic or
200
behavioral symptoms, without the required affective symptoms, likely meets criteria for
premenstrual syndrome and not for premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
Dysmenorrhea is a syndrome of painful menses, but this is distinct from a
syndrome characterized by affective changes. Moreover, symptoms of dysmenorrhea begin with
the onset of menses, whereas symptoms of premenstrual dysphoric disorder, by definition, begin
before the onset of menses, even if they linger into the first few days of menses.
Many 
women 
with
(either naturally occurring or substance/medication-induced) bipolar or major depressive disorder
or persistent depressive disorder believe that they have premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
However, when they chart symptoms, they realize that the symptoms do not follow a
premenstrual pattern. Because the onset of menses constitutes a memorable event, they may
report that symptoms occur only during the premenstruum or that symptoms worsen
premenstrually. This is one of the rationales for the requirement that symptoms be confirmed by
daily prospective ratings. The process of differential diagnosis, particularly if the clinician relies
on retrospective symptoms only, is made more difficult because of the overlap between
symptoms of premenstrual dysphoric disorder and some other diagnoses. The overlap of
symptoms is particularly salient for differentiating premenstrual dysphoric disorder from major
depressive episodes, persistent depressive disorder, bipolar disorders, and borderline personality
disorder.
Some women who present with moderate to severe premenstrual
symptoms may be using hormonal treatments, including hormonal contraceptives. If such
symptoms occur after initiation of exogenous hormone use, the symptoms may be attributable to
the use of hormones rather than to the underlying condition of premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
If the woman stops hormones and the symptoms disappear, then this is consistent with
substance/medication-induced depressive disorder.
Women with chronic medical conditions may experience symptoms of
premenstrual dysphoria. As with any depressive disorder, medical conditions that could better
account for the symptoms should be ruled out, such as thyroid deficiency and anemia.
Comorbidity
A major depressive episode is the most frequently reported previous disorder in individuals
presenting with premenstrual dysphoric disorder. A wide range of medical conditions (e.g.,
migraine, asthma, allergies, seizure disorders) or other mental disorders (e.g., depressive and
bipolar disorders, anxiety disorders, bulimia nervosa, substance use disorders) may worsen in the
