premenstrual phase; however, the absence of a symptom-free period during the postmenstrual
interval obviates a diagnosis of premenstrual dysphoric disorder. These conditions are better
considered premenstrual exacerbation of a current mental disorder or medical condition.
Although the diagnosis of premenstrual dysphoric disorder should not be assigned in situations
in which an individual experiences only a premenstrual exacerbation of another mental or
physical disorder, it can be considered in addition to the diagnosis of another mental disorder or
medical condition if the individual experiences symptoms and changes in level of functioning
that are characteristic of premenstrual dysphoric disorder and markedly different from the
symptoms experienced as part of the ongoing disorder.
201
Substance/Medication-Induced Depressive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical
picture and is characterized by depressed mood or markedly diminished interest
or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
of both (1) and (2):
1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance
intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a
medication.
2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in
Criterion A.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by a depressive disorder that is not
substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent depressive
disorder could include the following:
The symptoms preceded the onset of the substance/medication use; the
symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after the
cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other evidence
suggesting the existence of an independent non-substance/medication-induced
depressive disorder (e.g., a history of recurrent non-substance/medication-
related episodes).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance
intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A
predominate in the clinical picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant
