medication.
Recording Procedures
The name of the substance/medication-induced depressive disorder begins with the specific
substance (e.g., cocaine, dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing the depressive
symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set, which is
based on the drug class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance use disorder. For
substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for “other (or
unknown) substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an
etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown, the same code should also be
used.
When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is
listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance-induced
depressive disorder, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication, onset
during withdrawal). For example, in the case of depressive symptoms occurring during
withdrawal in a man with a severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is F14.24 severe cocaine
use disorder with cocaine-induced depressive disorder, with onset during withdrawal. A separate
diagnosis of the comorbid severe cocaine use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced
depressive disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time
heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F16.94
phencyclidine-induced depressive disorder, with onset during intoxication). When more than one
substance is judged to play a significant role in the development of depressive
203
mood symptoms, each should be listed separately (e.g., F15.24 severe methylphenidate use
disorder with methylphenidate-induced depressive disorder, with onset during withdrawal;
F19.94 dexamethasone-induced depressive disorder, with onset during intoxication).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of substance/medication-induced depressive disorder is a prominent and
persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical picture and is characterized by
depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities
(Criterion A) that is due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a
medication, or a toxin exposure) (Criterion B). In order to meet criteria for the diagnosis, the
depressive symptoms must have developed during or soon after substance intoxication or
withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a medication, as evidenced by clinical
history, physical examination, or laboratory findings (Criterion B1), and the involved
substance/medication must be capable of producing the depressive symptoms (Criterion B2). In
addition, the depressed symptoms are not better explained by a non-substance/medication-
induced depressive disorder.
Evidence of an independent depressive disorder includes the observation that the depressive
symptoms preceded the onset of substance/medication use, the depressive symptoms persist
beyond a substantial period of time after the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication,
