or there is other evidence that suggests the existence of an independent non-
substance/medication-induced depressive disorder (Criterion C), such as a history of recurrent
non-substance-induced depressive episodes. This diagnosis should not be made when symptoms
occur exclusively during the course of a delirium (Criterion D). Finally, the diagnosis requires
that the substance/medication-induced depressive symptoms cause clinically significant distress
or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion E). The
substance-induced depressive disorder diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of
substance intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A
predominate in the clinical picture and are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical
attention.
The two categories of drugs of abuse most likely to cause a substance/medication-induced
depressive disorder are depressants (e.g., intoxication with alcohol, benzodiazepines and other
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic drugs) and stimulants (e.g., withdrawal from amphetamine-type
substances and cocaine). Some medications (e.g., steroids; antihypertensive medications such as
clonidine, guanethidine, methyldopoa, and reserpine; interferon; L-dopa) are especially likely to
cause 
substance/medication-induced 
depressive 
syndromes. 
Substances 
implicated 
in
medication-induced depressive disorder, with varying degrees of evidence, include antibiotics,
antiviral agents (efavirenz), cardiovascular agents (beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers,
retinoic acid derivatives (isotretinoin), antidepressants, anticonvulsants, antimigraine agents
(triptans), antipsychotics, hormonal agents (corticosteroids, oral contraceptives, gonadotropin-
releasing hormone agonists, tamoxifen), chemotherapeutic drugs, and smoking cessation agents
(varenicline). This list is likely to grow as new compounds are synthesized.
Clear clinical histories and careful judgment are essential in determining whether the
substance of abuse or medication is truly associated with induced depressive symptoms or
whether the symptoms are better understood as constituting an independent depressive disorder.
A diagnosis of a substance/medication-induced depressive disorder is most likely if the
individual was taking high doses of a relevant drug of abuse or medication and there is no past
history of independent depressive episodes. For example, a depressive episode that developed in
the context of heavy use of a relevant substance of abuse or within the first several weeks of
beginning alpha-methyldopa (an antihypertensive agent) in an individual with no history of
major depressive disorder would qualify for the diagnosis of a substance- or medication-induced
depressive disorder. In some cases, a previously established condition (e.g., major depressive
disorder, recurrent) can recur while the individual is
204
coincidentally taking a drug or medication that has the capacity to cause depressive
symptoms (e.g., alcohol and/or stimulants in context of heavy use, L-dopa, oral contraceptives).
In all of these cases, the clinician must make a judgment as to whether the medication is
causative in this particular situation.
A substance/medication-induced depressive disorder is distinguished from an independent
depressive disorder by the onset or course, or by other factors associated with the substance or
medication use. There must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings of use of a drug of abuse or a medication that is capable of producing depressive
symptoms after exposure to, withdrawal from, or intoxication with that substance prior to the
