onset of the depressive disorder. The neurochemical changes associated with intoxication and
withdrawal states for some substances can be relatively protracted, and thus intense depressive
symptoms can last for a longer period after the cessation of substance use and still be consistent
with a diagnosis of a substance/medication-induced depressive disorder.
Prevalence
The lifetime rate of alcohol- and stimulant-induced depressive episodes has been reported to be
40% or higher among individuals with relevant substance use disorders. However, in a nationally
representative U.S. adult population, the lifetime prevalence of substance/medication-induced
depressive disorder in the absence of a lifetime history of non-substance-induced depressive
disorder was only 0.26%. These data indicate that special care must be taken to search for and
address substance-induced conditions in individuals with alcohol and stimulant use disorders.
Development and Course
A depressive disorder associated with the use of substances (e.g., alcohol, amphetamine-type
substances and/or cocaine, or a prescribed treatment for medical conditions) must have its onset
while the individual is using the substance or during withdrawal, if there is a withdrawal
syndrome associated with the substance. Most often, the depressive disorder has its onset within
the first few weeks or 1 month of heavy use of the substance. Once the substance is discontinued,
the depressive symptoms usually remit within days to several weeks, depending on the half-life
of the substance/medication and the presence of a withdrawal syndrome. If symptoms persist 4
weeks beyond the expected time course of withdrawal of a particular substance/medication, other
causes for the depressive mood symptoms should be considered.
There are several prospective controlled trials examining the association of depressive
symptoms with use of a prescribed medication, but most reports on this topic involve
retrospective series of individuals entering treatment, or participants in large cross-sectional
studies. More studies exist regarding the clinical course of alcohol- and illicit drug–induced
depressions, and most support the contention that the substance-induced conditions are very
likely to fade away within a relatively short time after abstinence. Equally important are
indications that individuals with significant residual depressive symptoms following treatment
for substance use disorders have a greater likelihood of relapse into their substance use.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Risk factors for substance-induced depressive disorder include a history of antisocial personality
disorder, schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder; a history of stressful life events in the past 12
months; a history of prior drug-induced depressions; and a family history of substance use
disorders. In addition, neurochemical changes associated with alcohol and other drugs of abuse
often contribute to depressive and anxiety symptoms during withdrawal that subsequently
influence ongoing substance use and reduce the likelihood of remission of substance use
disorders. The course of substance-induced depressive disorder may be worsened by social-
structural adversity associated with poverty, racism, and marginalization.
205
