Substance intoxication and withdrawal.
Independent depressive disorder.
Depressive disorder due to another medical condition.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Among individuals with a substance use disorder, the risk for developing a substance-induced
depressive disorder appears to be similar in men and women.
Diagnostic Markers
Laboratory assays of the suspected substance in the blood or urine are of limited value in
identifying substance-induced depressive disorder because blood and urine levels are often
negative when an individual comes for evaluation, reflecting the fact that substance-induced
depressions can last for up to 4 weeks after use of the drug of abuse or medication has ceased.
Therefore, a positive test value only means that an individual has had recent experience with a
substance but by itself does not establish a time course or other characteristics that are likely to
be associated with substance-induced depressive disorder. However, as is true of most mental
disorders, the most important data in diagnosing these conditions come from a detailed clinical
history and the mental status examination.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
The risk of suicide attempts is higher among individuals with possible alcohol use disorder
experiencing depressive episodes, whether substance induced or independent of substances, as
compared with control subjects.
Differential Diagnosis
Depressive symptoms occur commonly in substance
intoxication and substance withdrawal. A diagnosis of substance-induced depressive disorder
should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal when
the mood symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention. For
example, dysphoric mood is a characteristic feature of cocaine withdrawal. Substance-induced
depressive disorder with onset during withdrawal should be diagnosed instead of cocaine
withdrawal only if the mood disturbance in Criterion A predominates in the clinical picture and
is sufficiently severe to be a separate focus of attention and treatment.
A 
substance/medication-induced 
depressive 
disorder 
is
distinguished from an independent depressive disorder by the fact that even though a substance is
taken in high enough amounts to be possibly etiologically related to the symptoms, if the
depressive syndrome is observed at times other than when the substance or medication is being
used, it should be diagnosed as an independent depressive disorder.
Because individuals with medical conditions
often take medications for those conditions, the clinician must consider the possibility that the
mood symptoms are caused by the physiological consequences of the medical condition rather
than the medication, in which case depressive disorder due to another medical condition is
diagnosed. The history often provides the primary basis for such a judgment. At times, a change
in the treatment for the medical condition (e.g., medication substitution or discontinuation) may
be needed to determine empirically whether the medication is the causative agent. If the clinician
has ascertained that the disturbance is a function of both another medical condition and substance
use or withdrawal, then both diagnoses (i.e., depressive disorder due to another medical
