condition and substance/medication-induced depressive disorder) may be given. When there is
insufficient evidence to determine whether the depressive symptoms are associated with
substance (including a medication) ingestion or withdrawal or with another medical condition or
are independent (i.e., not a function of either a substance or another medical condition), a
diagnosis of other specified depressive disorder or unspecified depressive disorder is indicated.
206
Comorbidity
In one study using DSM-IV, comparing individuals with independent major depressive disorder
and no comorbid substance use disorder and individuals with substance/medication-induced
depressive disorder, those with substance/medication-induced depressive disorder had higher
rates of comorbidity with any DSM-IV mental disorder; were more likely to have specific
disorders of tobacco use disorder, gambling disorder, and antisocial personality disorder; and
were less likely to have persistent depressive disorder. Compared with individuals with major
depressive 
disorder 
and 
a 
comorbid 
substance 
use 
disorder, 
individuals 
with
substance/medication-induced depressive disorder are more likely to have alcohol or other
substance use disorder; however, they are less likely to have persistent depressive disorder.
Depressive Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical
picture and is characterized by depressed mood or markedly diminished interest
or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another
medical condition.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g.,
adjustment disorder, with depressed mood, in which the stressor is a serious
medical condition).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on the specifier (see below).
Specify if:
F06.31 With depressive features: Full criteria are not met for a major
depressive episode.
F06.32 With major depressive–like episode: Full criteria are met (except
Criterion C) for a major depressive episode.
