F06.34 With mixed features: Symptoms of mania or hypomania are also
present but do not predominate in the clinical picture.
Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the
mental disorder (e.g., F06.31 depressive disorder due to hypothyroidism, with
depressive features). The other medical condition should also be coded and listed
separately immediately before the depressive disorder due to the medical condition
(e.g., E03.9 hypothyroidism; F06.31 depressive disorder due to hypothyroidism,
with depressive features).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of depressive disorder due to another medical condition is a prominent and
persistent period of depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost
all, activities that predominates in the clinical picture (Criterion A) and that is thought to be due
to the physiological effects of another medical condition (Criterion B). In determining whether
the mood disturbance is due to another medical condition, the clinician must first establish the
presence of another medical condition. Further, the clinician must establish that the mood
disturbance is etiologically related to another medical condition through a physiological
207
mechanism. A careful and comprehensive assessment of multiple factors is necessary to make
this judgment. Although there are no infallible guidelines for determining whether the
relationship between the mood disturbance and another medical condition is etiological, several
considerations provide some guidance in this area. One consideration is the presence of a
temporal association between the onset, exacerbation, or remission of another medical condition
and that of the mood disturbance. A second consideration is the presence of features that are
atypical of independent depressive disorders (e.g., atypical age at onset or course or absence of
family history). Evidence from the literature that suggests that there can be a direct association
between another medical condition in question and the development of mood symptoms can
provide a useful context in the assessment of a particular situation.
Associated Features
Etiology (i.e., a causal relationship to another medical condition based on best clinical evidence)
is the key variable in depressive disorder due to another medical condition. The listing of the
medical conditions that are said to be able to induce major depression is never complete, and the
clinician’s best judgment is the essence of this diagnosis.
There are clear associations, as well as some neuroanatomical correlates, of depression with
cerebrovascular accident (CVA), Huntington’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and traumatic brain
injury (TBI). Among the neuroendocrine conditions most closely associated with depression are
Cushing’s syndrome and hypothyroidism. Autoimmune disorders, such systemic lupus
erythematosus, and deficiencies of certain vitamins, such as vitamin B12, have also been linked
to depression. There are numerous other conditions thought to be associated with depression,
such as multiple sclerosis. However, the literature’s support for a causal association is greater
