with some conditions than with others. Currently, there is support for a direct pathophysiological
mechanism for depressive symptoms in focal lesions (CVA, TBI, neoplasm) affecting certain
brain regions, Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease, hypothyroidism, Cushing’s syndrome,
and pancreatic cancer.
Prevalence
Sex differences in prevalence depend somewhat on the sex difference associated with the
medical condition (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus is more common in women; stroke is
somewhat more common in middle-age men compared with women).
Development and Course
Following stroke, the onset of depression appears to be acute, occurring within a few days of the
CVA in the largest case series. However, in some cases, onset of the depression is weeks to
months following the CVA. In the largest series, the duration of the major depressive episode
following stroke was 9–11 months on average. With Parkinson’s disease and Huntington’s
disease, depression often precedes the major motor impairments and cognitive impairments
associated with each condition. This is more prominently the case for Huntington’s disease, in
which depression is considered to be the first neuropsychiatric symptom. There is some
observational evidence that depression is less common as the neurocognitive disorder due to
Huntington’s disease progresses. In some individuals with static brain injuries and other central
nervous system diseases, mood symptoms may be episodic (i.e., recurring) over the course of the
disorder. In Cushing’s syndrome and hypothyroidism, depression can be an early manifestation
of the disease. In pancreatic cancer, depression often precedes other features.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
The risk of acute onset of a major depressive disorder following a CVA (within 1 day to a week
of the event) appears to be strongly correlated with lesion location, with greatest risk associated
with left frontal strokes and least risk apparently associated with right frontal lesions
208
in those individuals who present within days of the stroke. The association with frontal regions
and laterality is not observed in depressive states that occur in the 2–6 months following stroke,
perhaps indicative of later depressive symptoms representing major depressive disorder,
adjustment disorder, or demoralization. In individuals with Parkinson’s disease, early age at
onset, greater burden of motor symptoms, and longer duration of the disease have been
associated with depression. Risk of depression after TBI has been associated with female gender,
prior depressive disorder, early psychiatric symptoms following injury, lower brain volume, and
unemployment.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Women may be at differentially higher risk for developing depression in the setting of
cardiovascular disease, particularly poststroke.
