Depressive disorders not due to another medical condition.
Medication-induced depressive disorder.
Delirium and major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
Adjustment disorders.
Diagnostic Markers
Diagnostic markers pertain to those associated with the medical condition (e.g., steroid levels in
blood or urine to help corroborate the diagnosis of Cushing’s disease, which can be associated
with manic or depressive syndromes).
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
There are no epidemiological studies that provide evidence to differentiate the risk of suicide
from a major depressive episode due to another medical condition compared with the risk from a
major depressive episode in general. There are case reports of suicides in association with major
depressive episodes associated with another medical condition. There is a clear association
between serious medical illnesses and suicide, particularly shortly after onset or diagnosis of the
illness. Thus, it would be prudent to assume that the risk of suicide for major depressive episodes
associated with medical conditions is not less than that for other forms of major depressive
episode, and might even be greater.
Differential Diagnosis
Determination of whether a medical
condition accompanying a depressive disorder is causing the disorder depends on a) the absence
of an episode(s) of depressive episodes prior to the onset of the medical condition, b) the
probability that the associated medical condition has a potential to promote or cause a depressive
disorder, and c) a course of the depressive symptoms shortly after the onset or worsening of the
medical condition, especially if the depressive symptoms remit near the time that the medical
disorder is effectively treated or remits.
An important caveat is that some medical conditions are
treated with medications (e.g., steroids or alpha-interferon) that can induce depressive or manic
symptoms. In these cases, clinical judgment, based on all the evidence in hand, is the best way to
try to separate the most likely and/or the most important of two etiological factors (i.e.,
association with the medical condition vs. a substance-induced syndrome).
A separate diagnosis of depressive disorder due
to another medical condition is not given if the depressive disturbance occurs exclusively during
the course of a delirium. However, a diagnosis of depressive disorder due to another medical
condition may be given in addition to a diagnosis of major or mild neurocognitive disorder if the
depressive disturbance is judged to be a physiological consequence of the pathological process
causing the neurocognitive disorder and if symptoms of depression are a prominent part of the
clinical presentation.
It is important to differentiate a depressive episode from an adjustment
disorder, as the onset of the medical condition is in itself a life stressor that could
209
bring on either an adjustment disorder or an episode of major depression. The major
differentiating elements are the pervasiveness of the depressive picture and the number and
quality of the depressive symptoms that the individual reports or demonstrates on the mental
