Demoralization.
status examination. The differential diagnosis of the associated medical conditions is relevant but
largely beyond the scope of the present manual.
Demoralization is a common reaction to chronic medical illness. It is marked by
a sense of subjective incompetence, helplessness, and hopelessness, and a desire to give up. It is
often accompanied by depressive symptoms such as low mood and fatigue. Demoralization
typically lacks the anhedonia associated with depressive disorder due to another medical
condition, and individuals will generally find pleasure in previously meaningful activities and be
able to experience moments of happiness.
Comorbidity
Conditions comorbid with depressive disorder due to another medical condition are those
associated with the medical conditions of etiological relevance. It has been noted that delirium
can occur before or along with depressive symptoms in individuals with a variety of medical
conditions, such as Cushing’s disease. The association of anxiety symptoms, usually generalized
symptoms, is common in depressive disorders, regardless of cause.
Other Specified Depressive Disorder
F32.89
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a
depressive disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet
the full criteria for any of the disorders in the depressive disorders diagnostic class
and do not meet criteria for adjustment disorder with depressed mood or adjustment
disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood. The other specified depressive
disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate
the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for any specific
depressive disorder. This is done by recording “other specified depressive disorder”
followed by the specific reason (e.g., “short-duration depressive episode”).
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified”
designation include the following:
1. Recurrent brief depression: Concurrent presence of depressed mood and at
least four other symptoms of depression for 2–13 days at least once per month
(not associated with the menstrual cycle) for at least 12 consecutive months in
an individual whose presentation has never met criteria for any other depressive
or bipolar disorder and does not currently meet active or residual criteria for any
psychotic disorder.
2. Short-duration depressive episode (4–13 days): Depressed affect and at least
four of the other eight symptoms of a major depressive episode associated with
clinically significant distress or impairment that persists for more than 4 days, but
less than 14 days, in an individual whose presentation has never met criteria for
any other depressive or bipolar disorder, does not currently meet active or
