4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
5. Increase in energy or goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or
school, or sexually).
6. Increased or excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential
for painful consequences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying sprees,
sexual indiscretions, or foolish business investments).
7. Decreased need for sleep (feeling rested despite sleeping less than usual;
to be contrasted with insomnia).
B. Mixed symptoms are observable by others and represent a change from the
person’s usual behavior.
C. For individuals whose symptoms meet full criteria for either mania or
hypomania, the diagnosis should be bipolar I or bipolar II disorder.
D. The mixed symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication or other treatment).
Note: Mixed features associated with a major depressive episode have been
found to be a significant risk factor for the development of bipolar I or bipolar II
disorder. As a result, it is clinically useful to note the presence of this specifier
for treatment planning and monitoring of response to treatment.
With melancholic features:
A. One of the following is present during the most severe period of the current
major depressive episode (or the most recent major depressive episode if
major depressive disorder is currently in partial or full remission):
1. Loss of pleasure in all, or almost all, activities.
2. Lack of reactivity to usually pleasurable stimuli (does not feel much better,
even temporarily, when something good happens).
B. Three (or more) of the following:
1. A distinct quality of depressed mood characterized by profound
despondency, despair, and/or moroseness or by so-called empty mood.
2. Depression that is regularly worse in the morning.
3. Early-morning awakening (i.e., at least 2 hours before usual awakening).
4. Marked psychomotor agitation or retardation.
5. Significant anorexia or weight loss.
6. Excessive or inappropriate guilt.
Note: The specifier “with melancholic features” is applied if these features are
present at the most severe stage of the episode. There is a near-complete
absence of the
212
capacity for pleasure, not merely a diminution. A guideline for evaluating the lack
