of reactivity of mood is that even highly desired events are not associated with
marked brightening of mood. Either mood does not brighten at all, or it brightens
only partially (e.g., up to 20%–40% of normal for only minutes at a time). The
“distinct quality” of mood that is characteristic of the “with melancholic features”
specifier is experienced as qualitatively different from that during a
nonmelancholic depressive episode. A depressed mood that is described as
merely more severe, longer lasting, or present without a reason is not considered
distinct in quality. Psychomotor changes are nearly always present and are
observable by others.
 Melancholic features exhibit only a modest tendency to repeat across episodes
in the same individual. They are more frequent in inpatients, as opposed to
outpatients; are less likely to occur in milder than in more severe major
depressive episodes; and are more likely to occur in individuals with psychotic
features.
With atypical features: This specifier is applied when these features
predominate during the majority of days of the current major depressive episode
(or the most recent major depressive episode if major depressive disorder is
currently in partial or full remission) or current persistent depressive disorder.
A. Mood reactivity (i.e., mood brightens in response to actual or potential positive
events).
B. Two (or more) of the following:
1. Significant weight gain or increase in appetite.
2. Hypersomnia.
3. Leaden paralysis (i.e., heavy, leaden feelings in arms or legs).
4. A long-standing pattern of interpersonal rejection sensitivity (not limited to
episodes of mood disturbance) that results in significant social or
occupational impairment.
C. Criteria are not met for “with melancholic features” or “with catatonia” during
the same episode.
Note: “Atypical depression” has historical significance (i.e., atypical in
contradistinction to the more classical agitated, “endogenous” presentations of
depression that were the norm when depression was rarely diagnosed in
outpatients and almost never in adolescents or younger adults) and today does
not connote an uncommon or unusual clinical presentation as the term might
imply.
 Mood reactivity is the capacity to be cheered up when presented with positive
events (e.g., a visit from children, compliments from others). Mood may become
euthymic (not sad) even for extended periods of time if the external
circumstances remain favorable. Increased appetite may be manifested by an
obvious increase in food intake or by weight gain. Hypersomnia may include
either an extended period of nighttime sleep or daytime napping that totals at
least 10 hours of sleep per day (or at least 2 hours more than when not
