depressed). Leaden paralysis is defined as feeling heavy, leaden, or weighted
down, usually in the arms or legs. This sensation is generally present for at least
an hour a day but often lasts for many hours at a time. Unlike the other atypical
features, pathological sensitivity to perceived interpersonal rejection is a trait that
has an early onset and persists throughout most of adult life. Rejection sensitivity
occurs when the person is and is not depressed, though it may be exacerbated
during depressive periods.
With psychotic features: Delusions and/or hallucinations are present at any
time in the current major depressive episode (or the most recent major
depressive episode if major depressive disorder is currently in partial or full
remission). If psychotic features are present, specify if mood-congruent or mood-
incongruent:
213
With mood-congruent psychotic features: The content of all delusions and
hallucinations is consistent with the typical depressive themes of personal
inadequacy, guilt, disease, death, nihilism, or deserved punishment.
With mood-incongruent psychotic features: The content of the delusions or
hallucinations does not involve typical depressive themes of personal
inadequacy, guilt, disease, death, nihilism, or deserved punishment, or the
content is a mixture of mood-incongruent and mood-congruent themes.
With catatonia: This specifier is applied to the current major depressive episode
(or the most recent major depressive episode if major depressive disorder is
currently in partial or full remission) if catatonic features are present during most
of the episode. See criteria for catatonia associated with a mental disorder in the
chapter “Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders.”
With peripartum onset: This specifier is applied to the current major depressive
episode (or the most recent major depressive episode if major depressive
disorder is currently in partial or full remission) if onset of mood symptoms
occurs during pregnancy or in the 4 weeks following delivery.
Note: Mood episodes can have their onset either during pregnancy or
postpartum. About 50% of postpartum major depressive episodes begin prior
to delivery. Thus, these episodes are referred to collectively as peripartum
episodes.
 Between conception and birth, about 9% of women will experience a major
depressive episode. The best estimate for prevalence of a major depressive
episode between birth and 12 months postpartum is just below 7%.
 Peripartum-onset mood episodes can present either with or without
psychotic features. Infanticide (a rare occurrence) is most often associated
with postpartum psychotic episodes that are characterized by command
hallucinations to kill the infant or delusions that the infant is possessed, but
psychotic symptoms can also occur in severe postpartum mood episodes
