without such specific delusions or hallucinations.
 Postpartum mood (major depressive or manic) episodes with psychotic
features appear to occur in from 1 in 500 to 1 in 1,000 deliveries and may be
more common in primiparous women. The risk of postpartum episodes with
psychotic features is particularly increased for women with prior postpartum
psychotic mood episodes but is also elevated for those with a prior history of a
depressive or bipolar disorder (especially bipolar I disorder) and those with a
family history of bipolar disorders.
 Once a woman has had a postpartum episode with psychotic features, the
risk of recurrence with each subsequent delivery is between 30% and 50%.
Postpartum episodes must be differentiated from delirium occurring in the
postpartum period, which is distinguished by a fluctuating level of awareness
or attention.
 Peripartum-onset depressive disorders must be distinguished from the much
more common “maternity blues,” or what is known in lay terms as “baby
blues.” Maternity blues is not considered to be a mental disorder and is
characterized by sudden changes in mood (e.g., the sudden onset of
tearfulness in the absence of depression) that do not cause functional
impairment and that are likely caused by physiological changes occurring after
delivery. It is temporary and self-limited, typically improving quickly (within a
week) without the need for treatment. Other symptoms of maternity blues
include sleep disturbance and even confusion that can occur shortly after
delivery.
 Perinatal women may be at higher risk for depressive disorders due to
thyroid abnormalities as well as other medical conditions that can cause
depressive symptoms. If the depressive symptoms are judged to be due to
another medical condition related to the perinatal period, depressive disorder
due to another medical condition should be diagnosed instead of a major
depressive episode, with peripartum onset.
214
With seasonal pattern: This specifier applies to recurrent major depressive
disorder.
A. There has been a regular temporal relationship between the onset of major
depressive episodes in major depressive disorder and a particular time of the
year (e.g., in the fall or winter).
Note: Do not include cases in which there is an obvious effect of seasonally
related psychosocial stressors (e.g., regularly being unemployed every
winter).
B. Full remissions also occur at a characteristic time of the year (e.g., depression
disappears in the spring).
C. In the last 2 years, two major depressive episodes have occurred that
