demonstrate the temporal seasonal relationships defined above and no
nonseasonal major depressive episodes have occurred during that same
period.
D. Seasonal major depressive episodes (as described above) substantially
outnumber the nonseasonal major depressive episodes that may have
occurred over the individual’s lifetime.
Note: The specifier “with seasonal pattern” can apply to the pattern of major
depressive episodes in major depressive disorder, recurrent. The essential
feature is the onset and remission of major depressive episodes at characteristic
times of the year. In most cases, the episodes begin in fall or winter and remit in
spring. Less commonly, there may be recurrent summer depressive episodes.
This pattern of onset and remission of episodes must have occurred during at
least a 2-year period, without any nonseasonal episodes occurring during this
period. In addition, the seasonal depressive episodes must substantially
outnumber any nonseasonal depressive episodes over the individual’s lifetime.
 This specifier does not apply to those situations in which the pattern is better
explained by seasonally linked psychosocial stressors (e.g., seasonal
unemployment or school schedule). Major depressive episodes that occur in a
seasonal pattern are often characterized by loss of energy, hypersomnia,
overeating, weight gain, and a craving for carbohydrates.
 The prevalence of winter-type seasonal pattern appears to vary with latitude,
age, and sex. Prevalence increases with higher latitudes. Age is also a strong
predictor of seasonality, with younger persons at higher risk for winter depressive
episodes.
Specify if:
In partial remission: Symptoms of the immediately previous major depressive
episode are present but full criteria are not met, or there is a period lasting less
than 2 months without any significant symptoms of a major depressive episode
following the end of such an episode.
In full remission: During the past 2 months, no significant signs or symptoms of
the disturbance were present.
Specify current severity:
Severity is based on the number of criterion symptoms, the severity of those
symptoms, and the degree of functional disability.
Mild: Few, if any, symptoms in excess of those required to make the diagnosis
are present, the intensity of the symptoms is distressing but manageable, and
the symptoms result in minor impairment in social or occupational functioning.
Moderate: The number of symptoms, intensity of symptoms, and/or functional
impairment are between those specified for “mild” and “severe.”
Severe: The number of symptoms is substantially in excess of that required to
make the diagnosis, the intensity of the symptoms is seriously distressing and
unmanageable, and the symptoms markedly interfere with social and
