xxi
Preface to DSM-5-TR
The American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-5-TR), is the first published revision to
DSM-5. This revised manual integrates the original published DSM-5 diagnostic criteria with
modifications (mostly for clarity) for over 70 disorders, comprehensively updated descriptive
text accompanying each of the DSM disorders based on reviews of the literature since the
publication of DSM-5, and the addition of a new diagnosis, prolonged grief disorder, and
symptom codes for reporting suicidal and nonsuicidal self-injurious behavior. These changes
differ from the scope of the prior text revision, DSM-IV-TR, in which the updates were confined
almost exclusively to the text, leaving the diagnostic criteria virtually unchanged. This edition
also integrates all prior online updates made to DSM-5 after its publication in 2013, in response
to usage, specific scientific advances, and ICD-10-CM coding adjustments through an iterative
revision process. Consequently, DSM-5-TR is the product of three separate revision processes,
each one overseen by separate (but overlapping) groups of experts: the development of the
original DSM-5 diagnostic criteria and text by the DSM-5 Task Force, published in 2013;
updates to the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria and text by the DSM Steering Committee, which has
overseen the iterative revision process; and fully updated text overseen by the Revision
Subcommittee.
The clinical and research understanding of mental disorders continues to advance. As a
result, most of the DSM-5-TR disorder texts have had at least some revision since the 9 years
from original publication in DSM-5, with the overwhelming majority having had significant
revisions. Sections of the text that were most extensively updated were Prevalence, Risk and
Prognostic Factors, Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues, Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic
Issues, Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior, and Comorbidity. Also, for the first
time ever, the entire DSM text has been reviewed and revised by a Work Group on Ethnoracial
Equity and Inclusion to ensure appropriate attention to risk factors such as the experience of
racism and discrimination, as well as to the use of non-stigmatizing language. For future periodic
DSM-5-TR coding and other updates, see www.dsm5.org.
For benefit of reference in this manual, “DSM” refers generally to DSM as an entity, not
specifying a particular edition (e.g., “Clinical training and experience are needed to use DSM for
determining a clinical diagnosis.”). “DSM-5” refers to the entire set of currently approved
criteria sets, disorders, other conditions, and content officially published in May 2013. “DSM-5-
TR” refers to approved text in this current volume. Although the scope of the text revision did
not include conceptual changes to the criteria sets or to other DSM-5 constructs, the need to
make changes in certain diagnostic criteria sets for the purpose of clarification became apparent
in conjunction with the text updates made across the book. Because the conceptual construct of
criteria is unchanged, the criteria sets in DSM-5-TR that had their origins in DSM-5 are still
referred to as “DSM-5-criteria.” The new diagnostic entity prolonged grief disorder is referred to
