Anxiety Disorders
Anxiety disorders include disorders that share features of excessive fear and anxiety and
related behavioral disturbances. Fear is the emotional response to real or perceived imminent
threat, whereas anxiety is anticipation of future threat. Obviously, these two states overlap, but
they also differ, with fear more often associated with surges of autonomic arousal necessary for
fight or flight, thoughts of immediate danger, and escape behaviors, and anxiety more often
associated with muscle tension and vigilance in preparation for future danger and cautious or
avoidant behaviors. Sometimes the level of fear or anxiety is reduced by pervasive avoidance
behaviors. Panic attacks feature prominently within the anxiety disorders as a particular type of
fear response. Panic attacks are not limited to anxiety disorders but rather can be seen in other
mental disorders as well.
The anxiety disorders differ from one another in the types of objects or situations that induce
fear, anxiety, or avoidance behavior, and the associated cognition. Thus, while the anxiety
disorders tend to be highly comorbid with each other, they can be differentiated by close
examination of the types of situations that are feared or avoided and the content of the associated
thoughts or beliefs.
Anxiety disorders differ from developmentally normative fear or anxiety by being excessive
or persisting beyond developmentally appropriate periods. They differ from transient fear or
anxiety, often stress-induced, by being persistent (e.g., typically lasting 6 months or more),
although the criterion for duration is intended as a general guide with allowance for some degree
of flexibility and is sometimes of shorter duration in children (as in separation anxiety disorder
and selective mutism). Since individuals with anxiety disorders typically overestimate the danger
in situations they fear or avoid, the primary determination of whether the fear or anxiety is
excessive or out of proportion is made by the clinician, taking cultural contextual factors into
account. Many of the anxiety disorders develop in childhood and tend to persist if not treated.
Most occur more frequently in girls than in boys (approximately 2:1 ratio). Each anxiety disorder
is diagnosed only when the symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a
substance/medication or to another medical condition or are not better explained by another
mental disorder.
The chapter is arranged developmentally, with disorders sequenced according to the typical
age at onset. The individual with separation anxiety disorder is fearful or anxious about
separation from attachment figures to a degree that is developmentally inappropriate. There is
persistent fear or anxiety about harm coming to attachment figures and events that could lead to
loss of or separation from attachment figures and reluctance to go away from attachment figures,
as well as nightmares and physical symptoms of distress. Although the symptoms often develop
in childhood, they can be expressed throughout adulthood as well in the absence of a history of
childhood separation anxiety disorder.
Selective mutism is characterized by a consistent failure to speak in social situations in which
