there is an expectation to speak (e.g., school) even though the individual speaks in other
situations. The failure to speak has significant consequences on achievement in academic or
occupational settings or otherwise interferes with normal social communication.
216
Individuals with specific phobia are fearful or anxious about or avoidant of circumscribed
objects or situations. A specific cognition is not featured in this disorder, as it is in other anxiety
disorders. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is almost always immediately induced by the phobic
situation, to a degree that is persistent and out of proportion to the actual risk posed. There are
various types of specific phobias: animal; natural environment; blood-injection-injury;
situational; and other situations.
In social anxiety disorder, the individual is fearful or anxious about or avoidant of social
interactions and situations that involve the possibility of being scrutinized. These include social
interactions such as meeting unfamiliar people, situations in which the individual may be
observed eating or drinking, and situations in which the individual performs in front of others.
The cognition is of being negatively evaluated by others, by being embarrassed, humiliated, or
rejected, or offending others.
In panic disorder, the individual experiences recurrent unexpected panic attacks and is
persistently concerned or worried about having more panic attacks or changes his or her behavior
in maladaptive ways because of the panic attacks (e.g., avoidance of exercise or of unfamiliar
locations). Panic attacks are abrupt surges of intense fear or intense discomfort that reach a peak
within minutes, accompanied by physical and/or cognitive symptoms. Limited-symptom panic
attacks include fewer than four symptoms. Panic attacks may be expected, such as in response to
a typically feared object or situation, or unexpected, meaning that the panic attack occurs for no
apparent reason. Panic attacks function as a marker and prognostic factor for severity of
diagnosis, course, and comorbidity across an array of disorders, including, but not limited to,
anxiety, substance use, depressive, and psychotic disorders. The specifier “with panic attacks”
may therefore be used for panic attacks that occur in the context of any anxiety disorder, as well
as other mental disorders (e.g., depressive disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder).
Individuals with agoraphobia are fearful and anxious in many different situations, and the
diagnostic criteria require symptoms in two or more of the following: using public transportation,
being in open spaces, being in enclosed places, standing in line or being in a crowd, or being
outside of the home alone in other situations. The individual fears these situations because of
thoughts that escape might be difficult or help might not be available in the event of developing
panic-like symptoms or other incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms. These situations
consistently induce fear or anxiety and are often avoided or require the presence of a companion.
The key features of generalized anxiety disorder are persistent and excessive anxiety and
worry about various domains, including work and school performance, that the individual finds
difficult to control. In addition, the individual experiences physical symptoms, including
restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge; being easily fatigued; difficulty concentrating or
mind going blank; irritability; muscle tension; and sleep disturbance.
Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder involves anxiety due to substance
intoxication or withdrawal or to a medication treatment. In anxiety disorder due to another
medical condition, anxiety symptoms are the physiological consequence of another medical
