F93.0
condition.
Disorder-specific scales are available to better characterize the severity of each anxiety
disorder and to capture change in severity over time. For ease of use, particularly for individuals
with more than one anxiety disorder, these scales have been developed to have the same format
(but different focus) across the anxiety disorders, with ratings of behavioral symptoms, cognitive
symptoms, and physical symptoms relevant to each disorder.
Individuals with anxiety may be more likely to have suicidal thoughts, attempt suicide, and
die by suicide than those without anxiety. Panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and
specific phobia have been identified as the anxiety disorders most strongly associated with a
transition from suicidal thoughts to suicide attempt.
217
Separation Anxiety Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Developmentally inappropriate and excessive fear or anxiety concerning
separation from those to whom the individual is attached, as evidenced by at
least three of the following:
1. Recurrent excessive distress when anticipating or experiencing separation
from home or from major attachment figures.
2. Persistent and excessive worry about losing major attachment figures or
about possible harm to them, such as illness, injury, disasters, or death.
3. Persistent and excessive worry about experiencing an untoward event (e.g.,
getting lost, being kidnapped, having an accident, becoming ill) that causes
separation from a major attachment figure.
4. Persistent reluctance or refusal to go out, away from home, to school, to
work, or elsewhere because of fear of separation.
5. Persistent and excessive fear of or reluctance about being alone or without
major attachment figures at home or in other settings.
6. Persistent reluctance or refusal to sleep away from home or to go to sleep
without being near a major attachment figure.
7. Repeated nightmares involving the theme of separation.
8. Repeated complaints of physical symptoms (e.g., headaches, stomachaches,
nausea, vomiting) when separation from major attachment figures occurs or
is anticipated.
B. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, lasting at least 4 weeks in children
and adolescents and typically 6 months or more in adults.
C. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
academic, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
