flexibility. The disturbance must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
academic, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C).
Associated Features
When separated from major attachment figures, children and adults with separation anxiety
disorder may exhibit social withdrawal, apathy, sadness, or difficulty concentrating on work or
play. Depending on their age, individuals may have fears of animals, monsters, the dark,
muggers, burglars, kidnappers, car accidents, plane travel, and other situations that are perceived
as presenting danger to the family or themselves. Some individuals become homesick and
extremely uncomfortable when away from home. Separation anxiety disorder in children may
lead to school refusal, which in turn may lead to academic difficulties and social isolation. When
extremely upset at the prospect of separation, children may show anger or occasionally
aggression toward someone who is forcing separation. When alone, especially in the evening or
the dark, young children may report unusual perceptual experiences (e.g., seeing people peering
into their room, frightening creatures reaching for them, feeling eyes staring at them). Children
with this disorder may be described as demanding, intrusive, and in need of constant attention,
and, as adults, may appear dependent and overprotective as parents. Adults with the disorder are
likely to text or phone their major attachment figures throughout the day and repeatedly check on
their whereabouts. The individual’s excessive demands often become a source of frustration for
family members, leading to resentment and conflict within the family.
Prevalence
The 6- to 12-month prevalence of separation anxiety disorder in children is estimated to be
approximately 4%. In a community sample of toddlers, separation anxiety disorder appears to be
equally represented among girls and boys; however, school-age girls appear to have higher
prevalence rates than school-age boys. In adolescents in the United States, the 12-month
prevalence is 1.6%. Separation anxiety disorder decreases in prevalence from childhood through
adolescence and adulthood. In clinical samples of children, the disorder is equally common in
boys and girls in contrast to community samples, where the
219
disorder is more frequent in girls. Reports from children tend to yield higher rates of separation
anxiety disorder than parent reports of the child’s symptoms.
For adults, the 12-month prevalence of separation anxiety disorder in the United States
ranges from 0.9% to 1.9%. Among adults with separation anxiety disorder, women tend to have
higher prevalence rates of the disorder in both clinical and community studies. Across 18
countries, the mean 12-month prevalence in adults is 1.0%, with a range of < 0.1% to 2.7% (e.g.,
0.3% in Romania, 2.7% in Colombia). A higher prevalence was observed in women compared
with men in this total sample (1.3% compared with 0.8%).
Development and Course
Periods of heightened separation anxiety from attachment figures are part of normal early
development and may indicate the development of secure attachment relationships (e.g., around
