Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
age 1 year, when infants may experience stranger anxiety). Onset of separation anxiety disorder
may be as early as preschool age and may occur at any time during childhood and in
adolescence. Across 18 countries, median age at onset reported by adults (age 18 years and
older) with the disorder is in late adolescence in high- and upper-middle-income countries and in
the mid-20’s in low- and lower-middle-income countries. Most adults report a fluctuating course
of the disorder over their lifetime, and they may report some symptoms in childhood.
Typically there are periods of exacerbation and remission. In some cases, both the anxiety
about possible separation and the avoidance of situations involving separation from the home or
nuclear family (e.g., going away to college, moving away from attachment figures) may persist
through adulthood. However, the majority of children with separation anxiety disorder are free of
impairing anxiety disorders over their lifetimes.
The manifestations of separation anxiety disorder vary with age. Younger children are more
reluctant to go to school or may avoid school altogether. Younger children may not express
worries or specific fears of definite threats to parents, home, or themselves, and the anxiety is
manifested only when separation is experienced. As children age, worries emerge; these are often
worries about specific dangers (e.g., accidents, kidnapping, mugging, death) or vague concerns
about not being reunited with attachment figures. In adults, separation anxiety disorder may limit
their ability to cope with changes in circumstances (e.g., moving, getting married). Adults with
the disorder are typically overconcerned about their offspring, spouses, parents, and pets and
experience marked discomfort when separated from them. They may also experience significant
disruption in work or social experiences because of needing to continuously check on the
whereabouts of a significant other.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Separation anxiety disorder often develops after life stress, especially a loss (e.g.,
the death of a relative or pet; an illness of the individual or a relative; a change of schools;
parental divorce; a move to a new neighborhood; immigration; a disaster that involved periods of
separation from attachment figures). Being bullied during childhood has been shown to be a risk
factor for the development of separation anxiety disorder. In young adults, other examples of life
stress include leaving the parental home, entering into a romantic relationship, and becoming a
parent. A history of parental overprotection and intrusiveness may be associated with separation
anxiety disorder in both childhood and adulthood.
There is evidence that separation anxiety disorder may be heritable.
Heritability was estimated at 73% in a community sample of 6-year-old twins, with higher rates
found in girls. Children with separation anxiety disorder display particularly enhanced sensitivity
to respiratory stimulation using CO2-enriched air. Separation anxiety disorder also appears to
aggregate in families.
220
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
There are cultural variations in the degree to which it is considered desirable to tolerate
separation, so that demands and opportunities for separation between parents and children are
avoided in some cultural contexts. For example, there is wide variation across countries and
