Generalized anxiety disorder.
Panic disorder.
Agoraphobia.
cultural contexts with respect to the age at which it is expected that offspring should leave the
parental home. Youth vary in their self-reports of separation anxiety symptoms; for instance,
Taiwanese youth endorse higher symptoms of separation anxiety compared with U.S. youth. It is
important to differentiate separation anxiety disorder from the high value some cultural
communities place on strong interdependence among family members.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Separation anxiety disorder in children and adolescents may be associated with an increased risk
for suicide, although this association is not specific to separation anxiety disorder and is found in
other anxiety disorders where there is significant comorbidity. A large twin study showed that
being bullied during childhood was a risk factor for suicidal thoughts during young adulthood.
Functional Consequences of Separation Anxiety Disorder
Individuals with separation anxiety disorder often limit independent activities away from home
or attachment figures (e.g., in children, avoiding school, not going to camp, having difficulty
sleeping alone; in adolescents, not going away to college; in adults, not leaving the parental
home, not traveling long distances without their close attachments, not working outside the
home). Symptoms in adults are often debilitating and affect multiple areas of their lives. For
example, adults with separation anxiety disorder may deliberately reorganize their work
schedules and other activities because of their anxieties about possible separations from close
attachment figures; they may often express frustration with the limitations on their lives because
of their need to maintain proximity to, or at least virtual contact with, their key attachment
figures (e.g., by texting or phoning them repeatedly throughout the day). Separation anxiety
disorder is associated with greater reported impairment in individuals from high- and upper-
middle-income countries compared with those from low- and lower-middle-income countries.
Differential Diagnosis
Separation anxiety disorder is distinguished from generalized anxiety
disorder in that the anxiety in separation anxiety disorder predominantly concerns real or
imagined separation from attachment figures. Furthermore, if other worries occur, they are not
excessive.
In separation anxiety disorder, threats of separation from close attachments may
lead to extreme anxiety and panic attacks. In contrast to panic disorder, where panic attacks
occur unexpectedly and are usually accompanied by fears of dying or going “crazy,” the panic
attacks in separation anxiety disorder occur in anticipation of real or imagined separations from
attachment figures or places of safety and security, or from worries that untoward events will
befall the individual’s close attachments.
Unlike individuals with agoraphobia, those with separation anxiety disorder are not
anxious about being trapped or incapacitated in situations from which escape is perceived as
difficult in the event of panic-like symptoms or other incapacitating symptoms. Instead, they fear
being away from places of safety associated with their major attachment figures.
221
