F94.0
specific phobia. In adults, common comorbidities include specific phobia, PTSD, panic disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder, agoraphobia, obsessive-compulsive
disorder, prolonged grief disorder, and personality disorders. Among the personality disorders,
dependent, avoidant, and obsessive-compulsive (Cluster C) personality disorders may be
comorbid with separation anxiety disorder. Depressive and bipolar disorders are also comorbid
with separation anxiety disorder in adults.
222
Selective Mutism
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Consistent failure to speak in specific social situations in which there is an
expectation for speaking (e.g., at school) despite speaking in other situations.
B. The disturbance interferes with educational or occupational achievement or with
social communication.
C. The duration of the disturbance is at least 1 month (not limited to the first month
of school).
D. The failure to speak is not attributable to a lack of knowledge of, or comfort with,
the spoken language required in the social situation.
E. The disturbance is not better explained by a communication disorder (e.g.,
childhood-onset fluency disorder) and does not occur exclusively during the
course of autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, or another psychotic
disorder.
Diagnostic Features
When encountering other individuals in social interactions, children with selective mutism do not
initiate speech or reciprocally respond when spoken to by others. Lack of speech occurs in social
interactions with children or adults. Children with selective mutism will speak in their home in
the presence of immediate family members but often not even in front of close friends or second-
degree relatives, such as grandparents or cousins. The disturbance is most often marked by high
social anxiety. Children with selective mutism often refuse to speak at school, leading to
academic or educational impairment, as teachers often find it difficult to assess skills such as
reading. The lack of speech may interfere with social communication, although children with this
disorder sometimes use nonspoken or nonverbal means (e.g., grunting, pointing, writing) to
communicate and may be willing or eager to perform or engage in social encounters when
speech is not required (e.g., nonverbal parts in school plays).
Associated Features
Associated features of selective mutism may include excessive shyness, fear of social
