Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
embarrassment, social isolation and withdrawal, clinging, compulsive traits, negativism, temper
tantrums, or mild oppositional behavior. Although children with this disorder generally have
normal language skills, there may occasionally be an associated communication disorder,
although no particular association with a specific communication disorder has been identified.
Even when these disorders are present, anxiety is present as well. In clinical settings, children
with selective mutism are almost always given an additional diagnosis of another anxiety
disorder—most commonly, social anxiety disorder.
Prevalence
Selective mutism is a relatively rare disorder and has not been included as a diagnostic category
in epidemiological studies of prevalence of childhood disorders. Point prevalence using various
clinic or school samples in the United States, Europe, and Israel ranges between 0.03% and 1.9%
depending on the setting and ages of the sample. Studies in community-based and treatment-
seeking samples suggest an equal gender distribution for selective mutism, although there is also
evidence that selective mutism is more common among girls than boys. Prevalence does not
seem to vary by race/ethnicity, but individuals who need to speak in a non-native language (e.g.,
children of immigrant families) run greater risk for developing the disorder. The disorder is more
likely to manifest in young children than in adolescents and adults.
223
Development and Course
The onset of selective mutism is usually before age 5 years, but the disturbance may not come to
clinical attention until entry into school, where there is an increase in social interaction and
performance tasks, such as reading aloud. The persistence of the disorder is variable. Although
clinical reports suggest that many individuals “outgrow” selective mutism, the longitudinal
course of the disorder is largely unknown. In most cases, selective mutism may fade, but
symptoms of social anxiety disorder often remain.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental risk factors for selective mutism are not well identified.
Negative affectivity (neuroticism) or behavioral inhibition may play a role, as may parental
history of shyness, social isolation, and social anxiety. Children with selective mutism may have
subtle receptive language difficulties compared with their peers, although receptive language is
still within the normal range.
Social inhibition on the part of parents may serve as a model for social reticence
and selective mutism in children. Furthermore, parents of children with selective mutism have
been described as overprotective or more controlling than parents of children with other anxiety
disorders or no disorder.
Because of the significant overlap between selective mutism and social
anxiety disorder, there may be shared genetic factors between these conditions. There is also
evidence for increased abnormalities in the auditory efferent neural activity during vocalization
in individuals with selective mutism, which could lead to peculiarities in the perception of their
