as a DSM-5-TR disorder, because of its addition in this volume.
The development of DSM-5-TR was a tremendous team effort. We are especially indebted to
the tireless efforts of Wilson M. Compton, M.D., M.P.E., and Daniel S. Pine, M.D., as DSM-5
Text Revision Subcommittee Vice Chairs, as well as the more than 200 experts from across our
field who did the lion’s share of the work in the preparation of the text revision. We would also
like to thank Paul Appelbaum, M.D., Chair of the DSM Steering
xxii
Committee, along with the entire DSM Steering Committee, for their careful review of the
text and criteria clarifications, and for making other helpful suggestions. Special gratitude goes to
Ann M. Eng, DSM Managing Editor, for her timely shepherding of the DSM-5-TR development
process from planning to completion and for her meticulous attention to detail, all critical to the
success of this revision. We are grateful for the valuable contributions and help of Nitin Gogtay,
M.D., Chief of the American Psychiatric Association Division of Research and Deputy Medical
Director; Diana E. Clarke, Ph.D., Managing Director of Research and Senior Research
Statistician/Epidemiologist; and Lamyaa H. Yousif, M.D., Ph.D., M.Sc., Senior DSM Operations
Manager and Research Associate. We are thankful for the leadership of John McDuffie,
Publisher, American Psychiatric Association Publishing, and the work of the following editorial
and production staff at American Psychiatric Association Publishing in bringing this important
work to fruition: Greg Kuny, Managing Editor, Books; Tammy Cordova, Graphic Design
Manager; Andrew Wilson, Director of Production; Judy Castagna, Assistant Director of
Production Services; Erika Parker, Acquisitions Editor; Alisa Riccardi, Senior Editor, Books;
and Carrie Y. Farnham, Senior Editor, Books. Finally, we also recognize with appreciation Saul
Levin, M.D., M.P.A., CEO and Medical Director of the American Psychiatric Association, for
his advocacy and support of this comprehensive text revision.
Michael B. First, M.D.
Revision Subcommittee Co-Chair and DSM-5-TR Editor
Philip Wang, M.D., Dr.P.H.
Revision Subcommittee Co-Chair
November 5, 2021
