Silent period in immigrant children learning a second language.
Communication disorders.
Neurodevelopmental disorders and schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders.
Social anxiety disorder.
own voice and hence a reticence to speak.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Children in families who have migrated to a country where a different language is spoken may
appear to have selective mutism because they may refuse to speak the new language because of
lack of knowledge of the language. Such children would not qualify for the diagnosis because
such cases are explicitly excluded from the diagnosis.
Functional Consequences of Selective Mutism
Selective mutism may result in social impairment, as children may be too anxious to engage in
reciprocal social interaction with other children. As children with selective mutism mature, they
may face increasing social isolation. In school settings, these children may suffer academic
impairment, because often they do not communicate with teachers regarding their academic or
personal needs (e.g., not understanding a class assignment, not asking to use the restroom).
Severe impairment in school and social functioning, including that resulting from teasing by
peers, is common. In certain instances, selective mutism may serve as a compensatory strategy to
decrease anxious arousal in social encounters.
Differential Diagnosis
Selective 
mutism 
must 
be
distinguished from the typical “silent period” associated with the acquisition of a new language
in young children. If comprehension of the new language is adequate but refusal to speak persists
in both languages, in several unfamiliar settings, and for a prolonged period, a diagnosis of
selective mutism may be warranted.
Selective mutism should be distinguished from speech disturbances
that are better explained by a communication disorder, such as language disorder, speech sound
disorder (previously phonological disorder), childhood-onset
224
fluency disorder (stuttering), or social (pragmatic) communication disorder. Unlike selective
mutism, the speech disturbance in these conditions is not restricted to a specific social situation.
Individuals with an
autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia or another psychotic disorder, or severe intellectual
developmental disorder (intellectual disability) may have problems in social communication and
be unable to speak appropriately in social situations. In contrast, selective mutism should be
diagnosed only when a child has an established capacity to speak in some social situations (e.g.,
typically at home).
The social anxiety and social avoidance in social anxiety disorder may be
associated with selective mutism. In such cases, both diagnoses may be given.
Comorbidity
The most common comorbid conditions are other anxiety disorders, most often social anxiety
