disorder, followed by separation anxiety disorder and specific phobia. In clinical settings,
selective mutism and autism spectrum disorder have also been noted as frequently co-occurring
conditions. Oppositional behaviors can be observed in a substantial minority of children with
selective mutism, although this oppositional behavior may be limited to situations requiring
speech. Communication delays or disorders also may appear in some children with selective
mutism.
Specific Phobia
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Marked fear or anxiety about a specific object or situation (e.g., flying, heights,
animals, receiving an injection, seeing blood).
Note: In children, the fear or anxiety may be expressed by crying, tantrums,
freezing, or clinging.
B. The phobic object or situation almost always provokes immediate fear or anxiety.
C. The phobic object or situation is actively avoided or endured with intense fear or
anxiety.
D. The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual danger posed by the specific
object or situation and to the sociocultural context.
E. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, typically lasting for 6 months or
more.
F. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance causes clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
G. The disturbance is not better explained by the symptoms of another mental
disorder, including fear, anxiety, and avoidance of situations associated with
panic-like symptoms or other incapacitating symptoms (as in agoraphobia);
objects or situations related to obsessions (as in obsessive-compulsive
disorder); reminders of traumatic events (as in posttraumatic stress disorder);
separation from home or attachment figures (as in separation anxiety disorder);
or social situations (as in social anxiety disorder).
Specify if:
Code based on the phobic stimulus:
F40.218 Animal (e.g., spiders, insects, dogs).
F40.228 Natural environment (e.g., heights, storms, water).
F40.23x Blood-injection-injury (e.g., needles, invasive medical procedures).
225
Coding note: Select specific ICD-10-CM code as follows: F40.230 fear of
blood; F40.231 fear of injections and transfusions; F40.232 fear of other
