medical care; or F40.233 fear of injury.
F40.248 Situational (e.g., airplanes, elevators, enclosed places).
F40.298 Other (e.g., situations that may lead to choking or vomiting; in children,
e.g., loud sounds or costumed characters).
Coding note: When more than one phobic stimulus is present, code all ICD-10-CM
codes that apply (e.g., for fear of snakes and flying, F40.218 specific phobia, animal,
and F40.248 specific phobia, situational).
Specifiers
It is common for individuals to have multiple specific phobias. The average individual with
specific phobia fears three objects or situations, and approximately 75% of individuals with
specific phobia fear more than one situation or object. In such cases, multiple specific phobia
diagnoses, each with its own diagnostic code reflecting the phobic stimulus, would need to be
given. For example, if an individual fears thunderstorms and flying, then two diagnoses would be
given: specific phobia, natural environment, and specific phobia, situational.
Diagnostic Features
A key feature of this disorder is that the fear or anxiety is circumscribed to the presence of a
particular situation or object (Criterion A), which may be termed the phobic stimulus. The
categories of feared situations or objects are provided as specifiers. Many individuals fear objects
or situations from more than one category, or phobic stimulus. For the diagnosis of specific
phobia, the response must differ from normal, transient fears that commonly occur in the
population. To meet the criteria for a diagnosis, the fear or anxiety must be intense or severe (i.e.,
“marked”) (Criterion A). The amount of fear experienced may vary with proximity to the feared
object or situation and may occur in anticipation of or in the actual presence of the object or
situation. Also, the fear or anxiety may take the form of a full or limited symptom panic attack
(i.e., expected panic attack). Another characteristic of specific phobias is that fear or anxiety is
evoked nearly every time the individual comes into contact with the phobic stimulus (Criterion
B). Thus, an individual who becomes anxious only occasionally upon being confronted with the
situation or object (e.g., becomes anxious when flying only on one out of every five airplane
flights) would not be diagnosed with specific phobia. However, the degree of fear or anxiety
expressed may vary (from anticipatory anxiety to a full panic attack) across different occasions
of encountering the phobic object or situation because of various contextual factors such as the
presence of others, duration of exposure, and other threatening elements such as turbulence on a
flight for individuals who fear flying. Fear and anxiety are often expressed differently between
children and adults. Also, the fear or anxiety occurs as soon as the phobic object or situation is
encountered (i.e., immediately rather than being delayed).
The individual actively avoids the situation, or if he or she either is unable or decides not to
avoid it, the situation or object evokes intense fear or anxiety (Criterion C). Active avoidance
means the individual intentionally behaves in ways that are designed to prevent or minimize
contact with phobic objects or situations (e.g., takes tunnels instead of bridges on daily commute
to work for fear of heights; avoids entering a dark room for fear of spiders; avoids accepting a
job in a locale where a phobic stimulus is more common). Avoidance behaviors are often
