obvious (e.g., an individual who fears blood refusing to go to the doctor) but are sometimes less
obvious (e.g., an individual who fears snakes refusing to look at pictures that resemble the form
or shape of snakes). Many individuals with specific phobias have suffered over many years and
have changed their living circumstances in
226
ways designed to avoid the phobic object or situation as much as possible (e.g., an individual
diagnosed with specific phobia, animal, who moves to reside in an area devoid of the particular
feared animal). Therefore, they no longer experience fear or anxiety in their daily life. In such
instances, avoidance behaviors or ongoing refusal to engage in activities that would involve
exposure to the phobic object or situation (e.g., repeated refusal to accept offers for work-related
travel because of fear of flying) may be helpful in confirming the diagnosis in the absence of
overt anxiety or panic.
The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual danger that the object or situation poses,
or more intense than is deemed necessary (Criterion D). Although individuals with specific
phobia often recognize their reactions as disproportionate, they tend to overestimate the danger
in their feared situations, and thus the judgment of being out of proportion is made by the
clinician. The individual’s sociocultural context should also be considered. For example, fears of
the dark may be reasonable in a context of ongoing violence, and the degree of fear of insects
considered to be disproportionate would be higher in settings where insects are consumed in the
diet. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, typically lasting for 6 months or more
(Criterion E), which helps distinguish the disorder from transient fears that are common in the
population, particularly among children. The specific phobia must cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning in order for
the disorder to be diagnosed (Criterion F).
Associated Features
Individuals with specific phobia typically experience an increase in physiological arousal in
anticipation of or during exposure to a phobic object or situation. However, the physiological
response to the feared situation or object varies. Whereas individuals with situational, natural
environment, and animal specific phobias are likely to show sympathetic nervous system arousal,
individuals with blood-injection-injury specific phobia often demonstrate a vasovagal fainting or
near-fainting response that is marked by initial brief acceleration of heart rate and elevation of
blood pressure followed by a deceleration of heart rate and a drop in blood pressure.
Additionally, specific phobia is most consistently associated with abnormal activity in the
amygdala, anterior cingulate cortex, thalamus, and insula in response to the phobic
object/situation.
Prevalence
In the United States, the 12-month community prevalence estimate for specific phobia is
approximately 8%–12%. Prevalence rates in European countries are largely similar to those in
the United States (e.g., about 6%), but rates are generally lower in Asian, African, and Latin
American countries (2%–4%). Prevalence estimates in children average approximately 5%
