across various countries, with a range of 3%–9%, and are approximately 16% in adolescents ages
13–17 years in the United States. Prevalence estimates are lower in older individuals (about 3%–
5%), possibly reflecting diminishing severity to subclinical levels. Women are more frequently
affected than men across subtypes, at a rate of approximately 2:1.
Development and Course
Specific phobia sometimes develops following a traumatic event (e.g., being attacked by an
animal or stuck in an elevator), observation of others going through a traumatic event (e.g.,
watching someone drown), an unexpected panic attack in the to be feared situation (e.g., an
unexpected panic attack while on the subway), or informational transmission (e.g., extensive
media coverage of a plane crash). However, many individuals with specific phobia are unable to
recall the specific reason for the onset of their phobias. Specific phobia usually develops in early
childhood, with the majority of cases developing prior to age 10 years. Median age at onset is
between 7 and 11 years, with the mean at about 10 years.
227
Situational specific phobias tend to have a later age at onset than natural environment, animal, or
blood-injection-injury specific phobias. Specific phobias that develop in childhood and
adolescence are likely to wax and wane during that period. However, phobias that do persist into
adulthood are unlikely to remit for the majority of individuals.
When specific phobia is being diagnosed in children, two issues should be considered. First,
young children may express their fear and anxiety by crying, tantrums, freezing, or clinging.
Second, young children typically are not able to understand the concept of avoidance. Therefore,
the clinician should assemble additional information from parents, teachers, or others who know
the child well. Excessive fears are quite common in young children but are usually transitory and
only mildly impairing and thus considered developmentally appropriate. In such cases a
diagnosis of specific phobia would not be made. When the diagnosis of specific phobia is being
considered in a child, it is important to assess the degree of impairment and the duration of the
fear, anxiety, or avoidance, and whether it is typical for the child’s particular developmental
stage.
Although the prevalence of specific phobia is lower in older populations, it remains one of
the more commonly experienced disorders in late life. Several issues should be considered when
diagnosing specific phobia in older populations. First, older individuals may be more likely to
endorse natural environment specific phobias, as well as phobias of falling. Second, specific
phobia (like all anxiety disorders) tends to co-occur with medical concerns in older individuals,
including coronary heart disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and Parkinson’s
disease. Third, older individuals may be more likely to attribute the symptoms of anxiety to
medical conditions. Fourth, older individuals may be more likely to manifest anxiety in an
atypical manner (e.g., involving symptoms of both anxiety and depression) and thus be more
likely to warrant a diagnosis of unspecified anxiety disorder. Additionally, the presence of
specific phobia in older adults is associated with decreased quality of life and may serve as a risk
factor for major neurocognitive disorder.
Although most specific phobias develop in childhood and adolescence, it is possible for a
