Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
specific phobia to develop at any age, often as the result of experiences that are traumatic. For
example, phobias of choking almost always follow a near-choking event at any age.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental risk factors for specific phobia, such as negative affectivity
(neuroticism) or behavioral inhibition, are risk factors for other anxiety disorders as well.
Environmental 
risk 
factors 
for 
specific 
phobias, 
such 
as 
parental
overprotectiveness, parental loss and separation, and physical and sexual abuse, tend to predict
other anxiety disorders as well. As noted earlier, negative or traumatic encounters with the feared
object or situation sometimes (but not always) precede the development of specific phobia.
There may be a genetic susceptibility to a certain category of specific
phobia (e.g., an individual with a first-degree relative with a specific phobia of animals is
significantly more likely to have the same type of specific phobia than any other category of
phobia). Twin studies have examined the heritability of individual subtypes of fears and phobias,
suggesting that animal phobia has approximately 32% heritability, blood-injury-injection phobia
has 33%, and situational phobia has 25%.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
In the United States, individuals of Asian and Latinx descent report lower prevalence of specific
phobia than non-Latinx Whites and African Americans. The prevalence of specific phobia
subtypes varies cross-nationally.
228
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Animal, natural environment, and situational specific phobias are predominantly experienced by
women, whereas blood-injection-injury phobia is experienced nearly equally among women and
men. The average age at onset of specific phobia during childhood does not differ between
girls/women and boys/men.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Specific phobia is associated with both suicidal thoughts and suicide attempts based on national
U.S. survey data. Specific phobia is also associated with a transition from ideation to attempt.
For individuals in the community ages 14–24 years, a large prospective study over a 10-year
period in Germany found that 30% of first suicide attempts could be attributable to specific
phobia.
Functional Consequences of Specific Phobia
Individuals with specific phobia show similar patterns of impairment in psychosocial functioning
and decreased quality of life as individuals with other anxiety disorders and alcohol and
substance use disorders, including impairments in occupational and interpersonal functioning. In
older adults, impairment may be seen in caregiving duties and volunteer activities. Also, fear of
