Agoraphobia.
Social anxiety disorder.
Separation anxiety disorder.
Panic disorder.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
falling in older adults can lead to reduced mobility and reduced physical and social functioning,
and may lead to receiving formal or informal home support. The distress and impairment caused
by specific phobias tend to increase with the number of feared objects and situations. Thus, an
individual who fears four objects or situations is likely to have more impairment in his or her
occupational and social roles and a lower quality of life than an individual who fears only one
object or situation. Individuals with blood-injection-injury specific phobia are often reluctant to
obtain medical care even when a medical concern is present. Additionally, fear of vomiting and
choking may substantially reduce dietary intake.
Differential Diagnosis
Situational specific phobia may resemble agoraphobia in its clinical presentation,
given the overlap in feared situations (e.g., flying, enclosed places, elevators). If an individual
fears only one of the agoraphobic situations, then specific phobia, situational, may be diagnosed.
If two or more agoraphobic situations are feared, a diagnosis of agoraphobia is likely warranted.
For example, an individual who fears airplanes and elevators (which overlap with the “public
transportation” agoraphobic situation) but does not fear other agoraphobic situations would be
diagnosed with specific phobia, situational, whereas an individual who fears airplanes, elevators,
and crowds (which overlap with two agoraphobic situations, “using public transportation” and
“standing in line or being in a crowd”) would be diagnosed with agoraphobia. Criterion B of
agoraphobia (the situations are feared or avoided “because of thoughts that escape might be
difficult or help might not be available in the event of developing panic-like symptoms or other
incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms”) can also be useful in differentiating agoraphobia
from specific phobia. If the situations are feared for reasons other than not being able to escape
or get help, such as fear of being harmed directly by the object or situation (e.g., fear of the plane
crashing, fear of the animal biting), a specific phobia diagnosis may be more appropriate.
If the situations are feared because of negative evaluation, social anxiety
disorder should be diagnosed instead of specific phobia.
If the situations are feared because of separation from a primary
caregiver or attachment figure, separation anxiety disorder should be diagnosed instead of
specific phobia.
229
Individuals with specific phobia may experience panic attacks when confronted
with their feared situation or object. A diagnosis of specific phobia would be given if the panic
attacks only occurred in response to the specific object or situation, whereas a diagnosis of panic
disorder would be given if the individual also experienced panic attacks that were unexpected
(i.e., not in response to the specific phobia object or situation).
If an individual’s primary fear or anxiety is of an object or
situation as a result of obsessions (e.g., fear of blood due to obsessive thoughts about
contamination from blood-borne pathogens [i.e., HIV]; fear of driving due to obsessive images
of harming others), and if other diagnostic criteria for obsessive-compulsive disorder are met,
then obsessive-compulsive disorder should be diagnosed.
