Trauma- and stressor-related disorders.
Eating disorders.
Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
F40.10
If the phobia develops following a traumatic event,
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) should be considered as a diagnosis. However, traumatic
events can precede the onset of PTSD and specific phobia. In this case, a diagnosis of specific
phobia would be assigned only if all of the criteria for PTSD are not met.
A diagnosis of specific phobia is not given if the avoidance behavior is
exclusively limited to avoidance of food and food-related cues, in which case a diagnosis of
anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa should be considered.
When the fear and avoidance are attributable
to delusional thinking (as in schizophrenia or other schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
disorders), a diagnosis of specific phobia is not warranted.
Comorbidity
Specific phobia is rarely seen in medical-clinical settings in the absence of other
psychopathology and is more frequently seen in nonmedical mental health settings. Specific
phobia is frequently associated with a range of other disorders. Because of early onset, specific
phobia is typically the temporally primary disorder. Individuals with specific phobia are at
increased risk for the development of other disorders, including other anxiety disorders,
depressive and bipolar disorders, substance-related disorders, somatic symptom and related
disorders, and personality disorders (particularly dependent personality disorder).
Social Anxiety Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Marked fear or anxiety about one or more social situations in which the individual
is exposed to possible scrutiny by others. Examples include social interactions
(e.g., having a conversation, meeting unfamiliar people), being observed (e.g.,
eating or drinking), and performing in front of others (e.g., giving a speech).
Note: In children, the anxiety must occur in peer settings and not just during
interactions with adults.
B. The individual fears that he or she will act in a way or show anxiety symptoms
that will be negatively evaluated (i.e., will be humiliating or embarrassing; will
lead to rejection or offend others).
C. The social situations almost always provoke fear or anxiety.
Note: In children, the fear or anxiety may be expressed by crying, tantrums,
freezing, clinging, shrinking, or failing to speak in social situations.
D. The social situations are avoided or endured with intense fear or anxiety.
E. The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual threat posed by the social
situation and to the sociocultural context.
230
