F. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, typically lasting for 6 months or
more.
G. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance causes clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
H. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
I. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is not better explained by the symptoms of
another mental disorder, such as panic disorder, body dysmorphic disorder, or
autism spectrum disorder.
J. If another medical condition (e.g., Parkinson’s disease, obesity, disfigurement
from burns or injury) is present, the fear, anxiety, or avoidance is clearly
unrelated or is excessive.
Specify if:
Performance only: If the fear is restricted to speaking or performing in public.
Specifiers
Individuals with the performance only type of social anxiety disorder have performance fears
that are typically most impairing in their professional lives (e.g., musicians, dancers, performers,
athletes) or in roles that require regular public speaking. Performance fears may also manifest in
work, school, or academic settings in which regular public presentations are required. Individuals
with performance only social anxiety disorder do not fear or avoid nonperformance social
situations.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of social anxiety disorder is a marked, or intense, fear or anxiety of social
situations in which the individual may be scrutinized by others. In children the fear or anxiety
must occur in peer settings and not just during interactions with adults (Criterion A). When
exposed to such social situations, the individual fears that he or she will be negatively evaluated.
The individual is concerned that he or she will be judged as anxious, weak, crazy, stupid, boring,
intimidating, dirty, or unlikable. The individual fears that he or she will act or appear in a certain
way or show anxiety symptoms, such as blushing, trembling, sweating, stumbling over one’s
words, or staring, that will be negatively evaluated by others (Criterion B). Some individuals fear
offending others or being rejected as a result. Fear of offending others—for example, by a gaze
or by showing anxiety symptoms—may be the predominant fear in individuals from cultures
with strong collectivistic orientations. An individual with fear of trembling of the hands may
avoid drinking, eating, writing, or pointing in public; an individual with fear of sweating may
avoid shaking hands or eating spicy foods; and an individual with fear of blushing may avoid
public performance, bright lights, or discussion about intimate topics. Some individuals fear and
avoid urinating in public restrooms when other individuals are present (i.e., paruresis, or “shy
bladder syndrome”).
The social situations almost always provoke fear or anxiety (Criterion C). Thus, an individual
who becomes anxious only occasionally in the social situation(s) would not be diagnosed with
