social anxiety disorder. However, the degree and type of fear and anxiety may vary (e.g.,
anticipatory anxiety, a panic attack) across different occasions. The anticipatory anxiety may
occur sometimes far in advance of upcoming situations (e.g., worrying every day for weeks
before attending a social event, repeating a speech for days in advance). In children, the fear or
anxiety may be expressed by crying, tantrums, freezing, clinging, or shrinking in social
situations. The individual will often avoid the feared social situations. Alternatively, the
situations are endured with intense fear or anxiety (Criterion D). Avoidance can be extensive
(e.g., not going to parties, refusing school) or subtle (e.g., overpreparing the text of a speech,
diverting attention to others, limiting eye contact).
The fear or anxiety is judged to be out of proportion to the actual risk of being negatively
evaluated or to the consequences of such negative evaluation (Criterion E).
231
Sometimes, the anxiety may not be judged to be excessive, because it is related to an actual
danger (e.g., being bullied or tormented by others). However, individuals with social anxiety
disorder often overestimate the negative consequences of social situations, and thus the judgment
of being out of proportion is made by the clinician. The individual’s sociocultural context needs
to be taken into account when this judgment is being made. For example, in certain cultures,
behavior that might otherwise appear socially anxious may be considered appropriate in social
situations (e.g., might be seen as a sign of respect).
The duration of the disturbance is typically at least 6 months (Criterion F). This duration
threshold helps distinguish the disorder from transient social fears that are common, particularly
among children and in the community. The fear, anxiety, and avoidance must interfere
significantly with the individual’s normal routine, occupational or academic functioning, or
social activities or relationships, or must cause clinically significant distress (Criterion G). For
example, an individual who is afraid to speak in public would not receive a diagnosis of social
anxiety disorder if this activity is not routinely encountered on the job or in classroom work, and
if the individual is not significantly distressed about it. However, if the individual avoids, or is
passed over for, the job or education he or she really wants because of social anxiety symptoms,
Criterion G is met.
Associated Features
Individuals with social anxiety disorder may be inadequately assertive or excessively submissive
or, less commonly, highly controlling of the conversation. They may show overly rigid body
posture or inadequate eye contact, or speak with an overly soft voice. These individuals may be
shy or withdrawn, and they may be less open in conversations and disclose little about
themselves. They may seek employment in jobs that do not require social contact, although this
is not the case for individuals with social anxiety disorder, performance only. They may live at
home longer. Men may be delayed in marrying and having a family, whereas women who would
want to work outside the home may live a life without ever doing so. Self-medication with
substances is common (e.g., drinking before going to a party). Social anxiety among older adults
may also include exacerbation of symptoms of medical illnesses, such as increased tremor or
tachycardia. Blushing is a hallmark physical response of social anxiety disorder.
