xxiii
Preface to DSM-5
The American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM) is a classification of mental disorders with associated criteria designed
to facilitate more reliable diagnoses of these disorders. With successive editions over the past 60
years, it has become a standard reference for clinical practice in the mental health field. Since a
complete description of the underlying pathological processes is not possible for most mental
disorders, it is important to emphasize that the current diagnostic criteria are the best available
description of how mental disorders are expressed and can be recognized by trained clinicians.
DSM is intended to serve as a practical, functional, and flexible guide for organizing information
that can aid in the accurate diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders. It is a tool for clinicians,
an essential educational resource for students and practitioners, and a reference for researchers in
the field.
Although this edition of DSM was designed first and foremost to be a useful guide to clinical
practice, as an official nomenclature it must be applicable in a wide diversity of contexts. DSM
has been used by clinicians and researchers from different orientations (biological,
psychodynamic, cognitive, behavioral, interpersonal, family/systems), all of whom strive for a
common language to communicate the essential characteristics of mental disorders presented by
their patients. The information is of value to all professionals associated with various aspects of
mental health care, including psychiatrists, other physicians, psychologists, social workers,
nurses, counselors, forensic and legal specialists, occupational and rehabilitation therapists, and
other health professionals. The criteria are concise and explicit and intended to facilitate an
objective assessment of symptom presentations in a variety of clinical settings—inpatient,
outpatient, partial hospital, consultation-liaison, clinical, private practice, and primary care—as
well in general community epidemiological studies of mental disorders. DSM-5 is also a tool for
collecting and communicating accurate public health statistics on mental disorder morbidity and
mortality rates. Finally, the criteria and corresponding text serve as a textbook for students early
in their profession who need a structured way to understand and diagnose mental disorders as
well as for seasoned professionals encountering rare disorders for the first time. Fortunately, all
of these uses are mutually compatible.
These diverse needs and interests were taken into consideration in planning DSM-5. The
classification of disorders is harmonized with the World Health Organization’s International
Classification of Diseases (ICD), the official coding system used in the United States, so that the
DSM criteria define disorders identified by ICD diagnostic names and code numbers. In DSM-5,
both ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM codes (the latter scheduled for adoption in October 2015) are
attached to the relevant disorders in the classification.
Although DSM-5 remains a categorical classification of separate disorders, we recognize that
mental disorders do not always fit completely within the boundaries of a single disorder. Some
symptom domains, such as depression and anxiety, involve multiple diagnostic categories and
