Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence estimate of social anxiety disorder for the United States is
approximately 7%. Lower 12-month prevalence estimates are seen in much of the world using
the same diagnostic instrument, clustering around 0.5%–2.0%; median prevalence in Europe is
2.3%. Prevalence appears to be increasing in the United States and East Asian countries. Twelve-
month prevalence rates in young adolescents (ages 13–17 years) are roughly half those in adults.
Twelve-month prevalence rates decrease after age 65. The 12-month prevalence for older adults
in North America, Europe, and Australia ranges from 2% to 5%. In general, higher rates of social
anxiety disorder are found in women than in men in the general population (with odds ratios
ranging from 1.5 to 2.2), and the gender difference in prevalence is more pronounced in
adolescents and young adults. Gender rates are equivalent or slightly higher for men in clinical
samples, and it is assumed that gender roles and social expectations play a significant role in
explaining the heightened help-seeking behavior in men. Prevalence in the United States has
been found to be lower in individuals of Asian, Latinx, African American, and Caribbean Black
descent compared with non-Hispanic Whites.
Development and Course
Median age at onset of social anxiety disorder in the United States is 13 years, and 75% of
individuals have an age at onset between 8 and 15 years. The disorder sometimes emerges
232
out of a childhood history of social inhibition or shyness in U.S. and European studies. Onset can
also occur in early childhood. Onset of social anxiety disorder may follow a stressful or
humiliating experience (e.g., being bullied, vomiting during a public speech), or it may be
insidious, developing slowly. First onset in adulthood is relatively rare and is more likely to
occur after a stressful or humiliating event or after life changes that require new social roles (e.g.,
marrying someone from a different social class, receiving a job promotion). Social anxiety
disorder may diminish after an individual with fear of dating marries and may reemerge after
divorce. Among individuals presenting to clinical care, the disorder tends to be particularly
persistent.
Adolescents endorse a broader pattern of fear and avoidance, including of dating, compared
with younger children. Older adults express social anxiety at lower levels but across a broader
range of situations, whereas younger adults express higher levels of social anxiety for specific
situations. In older adults, social anxiety may concern disability due to declining sensory
functioning (hearing, vision) or embarrassment about one’s appearance (e.g., tremor as a
symptom of Parkinson’s disease) or functioning due to medical conditions, incontinence, or
cognitive impairment (e.g., forgetting people’s names). Detection of social anxiety disorder in
older adults may be challenging because of several factors, including a focus on somatic
symptoms, comorbid medical illness, limited insight, changes to social environment or roles that
may obscure impairment in social functioning, or reticence about describing psychological
distress. There is large variation in rates of remission for social anxiety disorder, suggestive of
different trajectories (short, fluctuating, and chronic).
