Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Underlying traits that predispose individuals to social anxiety disorder include
behavioral inhibition and fear of negative evaluation, as well as harm avoidance. Personality
traits consistently associated with social anxiety disorder are high negative affectivity
(neuroticism) and low extraversion.
There is evidence that negative social experiences, particularly peer victimization,
are associated with the development of social anxiety disorder, although causal pathways remain
unknown. Childhood maltreatment and adversity are risk factors for social anxiety disorder.
Among African Americans and Caribbean Blacks in the United States, everyday forms of ethnic
discrimination and racism are associated with social anxiety disorder.
Traits predisposing individuals to social anxiety disorder, such as
behavioral inhibition, are strongly genetically influenced. The genetic influence is subject to
gene-environment interaction; that is, children with high behavioral inhibition are more
susceptible to environmental influences, such as socially anxious modeling by parents. Also,
social anxiety disorder is heritable. First-degree relatives have a two to six times greater chance
of having social anxiety disorder, and liability to the disorder involves the interplay of disorder-
specific (e.g., fear of negative evaluation) and nonspecific (e.g., negative affectivity
[neuroticism]) genetic factors. Genetic contribution to social anxiety disorder has been found to
be higher for social anxiety disorder in children than social anxiety disorder in adults and higher
for social anxiety symptoms than a clinical diagnosis of social anxiety disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The nature and types of social situations that precipitate symptoms of social anxiety disorder are
similar across U.S. ethnoracial groups, including fear of performance/public speaking, social
interaction, and being observed. U.S. non-Latinx Whites report an earlier age at onset of social
anxiety disorder than U.S. Latinx, yet the latter describe greater impairment across home, work,
and relationship domains associated with the disorder.
233
Immigrant status is associated with lower rates of social anxiety disorder in both Latinx and non-
Latinx White groups. The syndrome of taijin kyofusho (e.g., in Japan and Korea) is often
characterized by social-evaluative concerns, fulfilling criteria for social anxiety disorder, which
are associated with the fear that the individual makes other people uncomfortable (e.g., “My gaze
upsets people so they look away and avoid me”), a fear that is at times experienced with
delusional intensity. Other presentations of taijin kyofusho may fulfill criteria for body
dysmorphic disorder or delusional disorder.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Age at onset of social anxiety disorder does not differ by gender. Women with social anxiety
disorder report a greater number of social fears and comorbid major depressive disorder and
other anxiety disorders, whereas men are more likely to fear dating; have oppositional defiant
disorder, conduct disorder, or antisocial personality disorder; and use alcohol and illicit drugs to
