Normative shyness.
Agoraphobia.
Panic disorder.
Generalized anxiety disorder.
relieve symptoms of the disorder. Paruresis is more common in men.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Among U.S. adolescents, social anxiety disorder has been reported to increase the risk for active
suicidal thoughts and suicide attempts in Latinx but not in non-Latinx Whites, independently of
the effect of major depression and family income.
Functional Consequences of Social Anxiety Disorder
Social anxiety disorder is associated with elevated rates of school dropout and with decreased
well-being, employment, workplace productivity, socioeconomic status, and quality of life.
Social anxiety disorder is also associated with being single, unmarried, or divorced and with not
having children, particularly among men, whereas women are more likely to be unemployed.
Social anxiety disorder is also negatively associated with friendship quality, such that individuals
with social anxiety disorder report having friendships that are less close and less supportive than
persons without the disorder. In older adults, there may be impairment in caregiving duties and
volunteer activities. Social anxiety disorder also impedes leisure activities. Despite the extent of
distress and social impairment associated with social anxiety disorder, only about half of
individuals with the disorder in high-income societies ever seek treatment, and they tend to do so
only after 15–20 years of experiencing symptoms. Not being employed is a strong predictor for
the persistence of social anxiety disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Shyness (i.e., social reticence) is a common personality trait and is not by
itself pathological. In some societies, shyness is even evaluated positively. However, when there
is a significant adverse impact on social, occupational, and other important areas of functioning,
a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder should be considered, and when full diagnostic criteria for
social anxiety disorder are met, the disorder should be diagnosed. Only a minority (12%) of self-
identified shy individuals in the United States have symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria for
social anxiety disorder.
Individuals with agoraphobia may fear and avoid social situations (e.g., going to a
movie) because escape might be difficult or help might not be available in the event of
incapacitation or panic-like symptoms, whereas individuals with social anxiety disorder are most
fearful of scrutiny by others. Moreover, individuals with social anxiety disorder are likely to be
calm when left entirely alone, which is often not the case in agoraphobia.
234
Individuals with social anxiety disorder may have panic attacks, but the panic
attacks are always cued by social situations and do not occur “out of the blue.” Additionally,
individuals with social anxiety disorder are more likely to be distressed by fear of negative
evaluation stemming from a panic attack than by the panic attacks themselves.
Social worries are common in generalized anxiety disorder, but the
focus is more on the nature of ongoing relationships rather than on fear of negative evaluation.
