Separation anxiety disorder.
Specific phobias.
Selective mutism.
Major depressive disorder.
Body dysmorphic disorder.
Delusional disorder.
Autism spectrum disorder.
Personality disorders.
Individuals with generalized anxiety disorder, particularly children, may have excessive worries
about the quality of their social performance, but these worries also pertain to nonsocial
performance and when the individual is not being evaluated by others. In social anxiety disorder,
the worries focus on social performance and others’ evaluation.
Individuals with separation anxiety disorder may avoid social settings
(including school refusal) because of concerns about being separated from attachment figures or,
in children, about requiring the presence of a parent when it is not developmentally appropriate.
Individuals with separation anxiety disorder are usually comfortable in social settings when their
attachment figure is present or when they are at home, whereas those with social anxiety disorder
may be uncomfortable when social situations occur at home or in the presence of attachment
figures.
Individuals with specific phobias may fear embarrassment or humiliation (e.g.,
embarrassment about fainting when they have their blood drawn), but they do not generally fear
negative evaluation in other social situations.
Individuals with selective mutism may fail to speak because of fear of negative
evaluation, but they do not fear negative evaluation in social situations where no speaking is
required (e.g., nonverbal play).
Individuals with major depressive disorder may be concerned about
being negatively evaluated by others because they feel they are bad or not worthy of being liked.
In contrast, individuals with social anxiety disorder are worried about being negatively evaluated
because of certain social behaviors or physical symptoms.
Individuals with body dysmorphic disorder are preoccupied with one
or more perceived defects or flaws in their physical appearance that are not observable or appear
slight to others; this preoccupation often causes social anxiety and avoidance. If their social fears
and avoidance are caused only by their beliefs about their appearance, a separate diagnosis of
social anxiety disorder is not warranted.
Individuals with delusional disorder may have nonbizarre delusions and/or
hallucinations related to the delusional theme that focus on being rejected by or offending others.
Although extent of insight into beliefs about social situations may vary, many individuals with
social anxiety disorder have good insight that their beliefs are out of proportion to the actual
threat posed by the social situation.
Social anxiety and social communication deficits are hallmarks of
autism spectrum disorder. Individuals with social anxiety disorder typically have adequate age-
appropriate social relationships and social communication capacity, although they may appear to
have impairment in these areas when first interacting with unfamiliar peers or adults.
Given its frequent onset in childhood and its persistence into and through
adulthood, social anxiety disorder may resemble a personality disorder. The most apparent
overlap is with avoidant personality disorder. Individuals with avoidant personality disorder have
a broader avoidance pattern and higher rates of impairment than those individuals with social
anxiety disorder. Moreover, individuals with avoidant personality disorder have a strong and
pervasively negative self-concept, a view of rejection as equating to a global evaluation of the
self as being of little worth, and a sense of not fitting in
