Other mental disorders.
Other medical conditions.
Oppositional defiant disorder.
F41.0
235
socially that dates from early childhood. Nonetheless, social anxiety disorder is typically more
comorbid with avoidant personality disorder than with any other personality disorder, and
avoidant personality disorder is more comorbid with social anxiety disorder than with any other
anxiety disorder.
Social fears and discomfort can occur as part of schizophrenia, but other
evidence for psychotic symptoms is usually present. In individuals with an eating disorder, it is
important to determine that fear of negative evaluation about eating disorder symptoms or
behaviors (e.g., purging and vomiting) is not the sole source of social anxiety before applying a
diagnosis of social anxiety disorder. Similarly, obsessive-compulsive disorder may be associated
with social anxiety, but the additional diagnosis of social anxiety disorder is used only when
social fears and avoidance are independent of the foci of the obsessions and compulsions.
Medical conditions may produce symptoms that may be embarrassing
(e.g., trembling in Parkinson’s disease). When the fear of negative evaluation due to other
medical conditions is judged to be excessive, a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder should be
considered.
Refusal to speak because of opposition to authority figures should be
differentiated from failure to speak because of fear of negative evaluation.
Comorbidity
Social anxiety disorder is often comorbid with other anxiety disorders, major depressive
disorder, and substance use disorders, and the onset of social anxiety disorder generally precedes
that of the other disorders, except for specific phobia and separation anxiety disorder. Chronic
social isolation in the course of social anxiety disorder may result in major depressive disorder.
Comorbidity with depression is high also in older adults. Substances may be used as self-
medication for social fears, but the symptoms of substance intoxication or withdrawal, such as
trembling, may also be a source of (further) social fear. Social anxiety disorder is frequently
comorbid with body dysmorphic disorder, and generalized social anxiety disorder is often
comorbid with avoidant personality disorder. In children, comorbidities with high-functioning
autism spectrum disorder and selective mutism are common.
Panic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recurrent unexpected panic attacks. A panic attack is an abrupt surge of intense
fear or intense discomfort that reaches a peak within minutes, and during which
time four (or more) of the following symptoms occur:
Note: The abrupt surge can occur from a calm state or an anxious state.
1. Palpitations, pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate.
