2. Sweating.
3. Trembling or shaking.
4. Sensations of shortness of breath or smothering.
5. Feelings of choking.
6. Chest pain or discomfort.
7. Nausea or abdominal distress.
8. Feeling dizzy, unsteady, light-headed, or faint.
9. Chills or heat sensations.
236
10. Paresthesias (numbness or tingling sensations).
11. Derealization (feelings of unreality) or depersonalization (being detached from
oneself).
12. Fear of losing control or “going crazy.”
13. Fear of dying.
Note: Culture-specific symptoms (e.g., tinnitus, neck soreness, headache,
uncontrollable screaming or crying) may be seen. Such symptoms should not
count as one of the four required symptoms.
B. At least one of the attacks has been followed by 1 month (or more) of one or
both of the following:
1. Persistent concern or worry about additional panic attacks or their
consequences (e.g., losing control, having a heart attack, “going crazy”).
2. A significant maladaptive change in behavior related to the attacks (e.g.,
behaviors designed to avoid having panic attacks, such as avoidance of
exercise or unfamiliar situations).
C. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g.,
hyperthyroidism, cardiopulmonary disorders).
D. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., the
panic attacks do not occur only in response to feared social situations, as in
social anxiety disorder; in response to circumscribed phobic objects or situations,
as in specific phobia; in response to obsessions, as in obsessive-compulsive
disorder; in response to reminders of traumatic events, as in posttraumatic stress
disorder; or in response to separation from attachment figures, as in separation
anxiety disorder).
Diagnostic Features
Panic disorder is characterized by recurrent unexpected panic attacks (Criterion A). (For a
detailed description of symptoms and course characterizing a panic attack, see Panic Attack
