Specifier, “Features” section, following this text on panic disorder.) A panic attack is an abrupt
surge of intense fear or intense discomfort that reaches a peak within minutes, and during which
time 4 or more of a list of 13 physical and cognitive symptoms occur. The term recurrent means
more than one unexpected panic attack. The term unexpected refers to a panic attack for which
there is no obvious cue or trigger at the time of occurrence—that is, the attack appears to occur
from out of the blue, such as when the individual is relaxing or emerging from sleep (nocturnal
panic attack). In contrast, expected panic attacks are those for which there is an obvious cue or
trigger, such as a situation in which panic attacks have typically occurred. The determination of
whether panic attacks are expected or unexpected is made by the clinician, who makes this
judgment based on a combination of careful questioning as to the sequence of events preceding
or leading up to the attack and the individual’s own judgment of whether the attack seemed to
occur for no apparent reason. Cultural interpretations may influence the assignment of panic
attacks as expected or unexpected (see section “Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues” for this
disorder). In the United States and Europe, approximately one-half of individuals with panic
disorder have expected panic attacks as well as unexpected panic attacks. Thus, the presence of
expected panic attacks does not rule out the diagnosis of panic disorder.
The frequency and severity of panic attacks vary widely. In terms of frequency, there may be
moderately frequent attacks (e.g., one per week) for months at a time, or short bursts of more
frequent attacks (e.g., daily) separated by weeks or months without any attacks or with less
frequent attacks (e.g., two per month) over many years. Individuals who have infrequent panic
attacks resemble those with more frequent panic attacks in terms of panic attack symptoms,
demographic characteristics, comorbidity with other disorders, family
237
history, and biological data. In terms of severity, individuals with panic disorder may have
both full-symptom (four or more symptoms) and limited-symptom (fewer than four symptoms)
attacks, and the number and type of panic attack symptoms frequently differ from one panic
attack to the next. However, more than one unexpected full-symptom panic attack is required for
the diagnosis of panic disorder.
A nocturnal panic attack (i.e., waking from sleep in a state of panic) differs from panicking
after fully waking from sleep. In the United States, nocturnal panic attack has been estimated to
occur at least one time in roughly one-quarter to one-third of individuals with panic disorder, of
whom the majority also have daytime panic attacks. Individuals with both daytime and nocturnal
panic attacks tend to have more severe panic disorder overall.
The worries about panic attacks or their consequences usually pertain to physical concerns,
such as worry that panic attacks reflect the presence of life-threatening illnesses (e.g., cardiac
disease, seizure disorder); social concerns, such as embarrassment or fear of being judged
negatively by others because of visible panic symptoms; and concerns about mental functioning,
such as “going crazy” or losing control (Criterion B). Individuals who report fears of dying in
their panic attacks tend to have more severe presentations of panic disorder (e.g., panic attacks
involving more symptoms). The maladaptive changes in behavior represent attempts to minimize
or avoid panic attacks or their consequences. Examples include avoiding physical exertion,
reorganizing daily life to ensure that help is available in the event of a panic attack, restricting
usual daily activities, and avoiding agoraphobia-type situations, such as leaving home, using
