public transportation, or shopping. If agoraphobia is present, a separate diagnosis of agoraphobia
is given.
Associated Features
In addition to worry about panic attacks and their consequences, many individuals with panic
disorder report constant or intermittent feelings of anxiety that are more broadly related to health
and mental health concerns. For example, individuals with panic disorder often anticipate a
catastrophic outcome from a mild physical symptom or medication side effect (e.g., thinking that
they may have heart disease or that a headache means presence of a brain tumor). Such
individuals often are relatively intolerant of medication side effects. In addition, there may be
pervasive concerns about abilities to complete daily tasks or withstand daily stressors, excessive
use of drugs (e.g., alcohol, prescribed medications or illicit drugs) to control panic attacks, or
extreme behaviors aimed at controlling panic attacks (e.g., severe restrictions on food intake or
avoidance of specific foods or medications because of concerns about physical symptoms that
provoke panic attacks).
Prevalence
In the general population, the 12-month prevalence estimate for panic disorder across the United
States and several European countries is about 2%–3% in adults and adolescents. The global
lifetime prevalence is estimated at 1.7%, with a 2.7% projected lifetime risk in the World Mental
Health Surveys. In the United States, significantly lower prevalence estimates of panic disorder
are reported among Latinx, African Americans, Caribbean Blacks, and Asian Americans,
compared with non-Latinx Whites. Prevalence estimates of panic disorder in American Indians
range from 2.6% to 4.1%. Lower estimates have been reported for Asian, African, and Latin
American countries, ranging from 0.1% to 0.8%. Women are more frequently affected than men,
at a rate of approximately 2:1. The gender differentiation occurs in adolescence and is already
observable before age 14 years. Although panic attacks occur in children, the overall prevalence
of panic disorder is low before age 14 years (<0.4%). The rates of panic disorder show a gradual
increase during adolescence and possibly following the onset of puberty, and peak during
adulthood. The prevalence declines in older individuals (i.e., 1.2% in adults older than age 55,
0.7% in adults older than age 64), possibly reflecting diminishing severity to subclinical levels.
238
Development and Course
The median age at onset for panic disorder in the United States is 20–24 years, and cross-
nationally is 32 years. The mean age at onset is 34.7 years. A small number of cases begin in
childhood, and onset after age 55 years is unusual but can occur. The usual course, if the disorder
is untreated, is chronic but waxing and waning. Some individuals may have episodic outbreaks
with years of remission in between, and others may have continuous severe symptomatology.
According to a longitudinal study in the Netherlands, about one-quarter of the individuals with
panic disorder experienced recurrence of symptoms within the initial 2-year follow-up period.
Only a minority of individuals have full remission without subsequent relapse within a few
years. The course of panic disorder typically is complicated by a range of other disorders, in
