Temperamental.
Environmental.
particular other anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, and substance use disorders (see section
“Comorbidity” for this disorder). African American adults have been reported to have a more
chronic course of panic disorder compared with non-Latinx White adults, possibly because of the
enduring impact of racism and discrimination, stigma due to mental illness, and limited access to
adequate care.
Although panic disorder is very rare in childhood, first occurrence of “fearful spells” is often
dated retrospectively back to childhood. As in adults, panic disorder in adolescents tends to have
a chronic course and is frequently comorbid with other anxiety, depressive, and bipolar
disorders. To date, no differences in the clinical presentation between adolescents and adults
have been found. However, adolescents may be less worried about additional panic attacks than
are young adults. Lower prevalence of panic disorder in older adults appears to be attributable to
age-related “dampening” of the autonomic nervous system response. Many older individuals
with “panicky feelings” are observed to have a “hybrid” of limited-symptom panic attacks and
generalized anxiety. Also, older adults tend to attribute their panic attacks to certain stressful
situations, such as a medical procedure or social setting. Older individuals may retrospectively
endorse explanations for the panic attack (which would preclude the diagnosis of panic disorder),
even if an attack might actually have been unexpected in the moment (and thus qualify as the
basis for a panic disorder diagnosis). This may result in under-endorsement of unexpected panic
attacks in older individuals. Thus, careful questioning of older adults is required to assess
whether panic attacks were expected before entering the situation, so that unexpected panic
attacks and the diagnosis of panic disorder are not overlooked.
While the low rate of panic disorder in children could relate to difficulties in symptom
reporting, this seems unlikely given that children are capable of reporting intense fear or panic in
relation to separation and to phobic objects or phobic situations. Adolescents might be less
willing than adults to openly discuss panic attacks. Therefore, clinicians should be aware that
unexpected panic attacks do occur in adolescents, much as they do in adults, and be attuned to
this possibility when encountering adolescents presenting with episodes of intense fear or
distress.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Negative affectivity (neuroticism) (i.e., proneness to experiencing negative
emotions), anxiety sensitivity (i.e., the disposition to believe that symptoms of anxiety are
harmful), behavioral inhibition, and harm avoidance are risk factors for the onset of panic attacks
and panic disorder. History of “fearful spells” (i.e., limited-symptom attacks that do not meet full
criteria for a panic attack) may be a risk factor for later panic attacks and panic disorder,
particularly when the first panic experience is appraised as negative. Although separation anxiety
in childhood, especially when severe, may precede the later development of panic disorder, it is
not a consistent risk factor.
Most individuals report identifiable stressors in the months before their first panic
attack (e.g., interpersonal stressors and stressors related to physical well-being,
239
such as negative experiences with illicit or prescription drugs, disease, or death in the family).
