Genetic and physiological.
Furthermore, more chronic life stress is associated with greater panic disorder severity. Between
10% and 60% of individuals with panic disorder endorse a history of trauma, and stressful life
experiences and childhood adversities are associated with more severe panic pathology. Parental
overprotection and low emotional warmth are also risk factors for panic disorder. Individuals
with few economic resources are more likely to have symptoms that meet criteria for panic
disorder. Smoking is a risk factor for panic attacks and panic disorder.
Multiple genes likely confer vulnerability to panic disorder; however,
the exact genes, gene products, or functions related to the genetic regions implicated remain
unknown. There is an increased risk for panic disorder among offspring of parents with anxiety,
depressive, and bipolar disorders.
Individuals with panic disorder display particularly enhanced sensitivity to respiratory
stimulation using CO2-enriched air. Respiratory disturbance, such as asthma, may be associated
with panic disorder, in terms of past history, comorbidity, and family history.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The rate of fears about mental and somatic symptoms of anxiety appears to vary across cultural
contexts and may influence the rate of panic attacks and panic disorder. Also, cultural
expectations may influence the classification of panic attacks as expected or unexpected. For
example, a Vietnamese individual who has a panic attack after walking out into a windy
environment (trúng gió; “hit by the wind”) may attribute the panic attack to exposure to wind as
a result of the cultural syndrome that links these two experiences, resulting in classification of
the panic attack as expected. Various other cultural concepts of distress are associated with panic
disorder, including ataque de nervios (“attack of nerves”) among Latin Americans and khyâl
attacks and “soul loss” among Cambodians. Ataque de nervios may involve trembling,
uncontrollable screaming or crying, aggressive or suicidal behavior, and depersonalization or
derealization, which may be experienced longer than the few minutes typical of panic attacks.
Some clinical presentations of ataque de nervios fulfill criteria for conditions other than panic
attack (e.g., functional neurological symptom disorder). These concepts of distress have an
impact on the symptoms and frequency of panic disorder, including the individual’s attribution
of unexpectedness, as cultural concepts of distress may create fear of certain situations, ranging
from interpersonal arguments (associated with ataque de nervios), to types of exertion
(associated with khyâl attacks), to atmospheric wind (associated with trúng gió attacks).
Clarification of the details of cultural attributions may aid in distinguishing expected and
unexpected panic attacks. For more information regarding cultural concepts of distress, refer to
the “Culture and Psychiatric Diagnosis” chapter in Section III.
The specific worries about panic attacks or their consequences are likely to vary across
ethnoracial groups and cultural contexts (and across different age groups and gender). Among
Asian Americans, Hispanic Americans, and African Americans in the United States, panic
disorder is associated with reports of ethnic discrimination and racism, after the effect of
demographic factors is taken into account. For panic disorder, U.S. community samples of non-
Latinx Whites have significantly less functional impairment than African Americans. There are
also higher rates of objectively defined severity in non-Latinx Caribbean Blacks with panic
disorder, and lower reported rates of panic disorder overall in both African Americans and
Caribbean Blacks, suggesting that among U.S. community samples of African descent, panic
