may reflect common underlying vulnerabilities for a larger group of disorders. In recognition of
this reality, the disorders included in DSM-5 were reordered into a revised organizational
structure meant to stimulate new clinical perspectives. This new structure corresponds with the
organizational arrangement of disorders planned for ICD-11 scheduled for release in 2015. Other
enhancements have been introduced to promote ease of use across all settings:
xxiv
Representation of developmental issues related to diagnosis. The change in chapter organization better reflects a lifespan
approach, with disorders more frequently diagnosed in childhood (e.g., neurodevelopmental disorders) at the beginning of
the manual and disorders more applicable to older adulthood (e.g., neurocognitive disorders) at the end of the manual. Also,
within the text, subheadings on development and course provide descriptions of how disorder presentations may change
across the lifespan. Age-related factors specific to diagnosis (e.g., symptom presentation and prevalence differences in
certain age groups) are also included in the text. For added emphasis, these age-related factors have been added to the
criteria themselves where applicable (e.g., in the criteria sets for insomnia disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder, specific
criteria describe how symptoms might be expressed in children). Likewise, gender and cultural issues have been integrated
into the disorders where applicable.
Integration of scientific findings from the latest research in genetics and neuroimaging. The revised chapter structure
was informed by recent research in neuroscience and by emerging genetic linkages between diagnostic groups. Genetic and
physiological risk factors, prognostic indicators, and some putative diagnostic markers are highlighted in the text. This new
structure should improve clinicians’ ability to identify diagnoses in a disorder spectrum based on common neurocircuitry,
genetic vulnerability, and environmental exposures.
Consolidation of autistic disorder, Asperger’s disorder, and pervasive developmental disorder into autism spectrum
disorder. Symptoms of these disorders represent a single continuum of mild to severe impairments in the two domains of
social communication and restrictive repetitive behaviors/interests rather than being distinct disorders. This change is
designed to improve the sensitivity and specificity of the criteria for the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder and to
identify more focused treatment targets for the specific impairments identified.
Streamlined classification of bipolar and depressive disorders. Bipolar and depressive disorders are the most commonly
diagnosed conditions in psychiatry. It was therefore important to streamline the presentation of these disorders to enhance
both clinical and educational use. Rather than separating the definition of manic, hypomanic, and major depressive episodes
from the definition of bipolar I disorder, bipolar II disorder, and major depressive disorder as in the previous edition, we
included all of the component criteria within the respective criteria for each disorder. This approach will facilitate bedside
diagnosis and treatment of these important disorders. Likewise, the explanatory notes for differentiating bereavement and
major depressive disorder will provide far greater clinical guidance than was previously provided in the simple bereavement
exclusion criterion. The new specifiers of anxious distress and mixed features are now fully described in the narrative on
specifier variations that accompanies the criteria for these disorders.
Restructuring of substance use disorders for consistency and clarity. The categories of substance abuse and substance
dependence have been eliminated and replaced with an overarching new category of substance use disorders—with the
specific substance used defining the specific disorders. “Dependence” has been easily confused with the term “addiction”
when, in fact, the tolerance and withdrawal that previously defined dependence are actually very normal responses to
prescribed medications that affect the central nervous system and do not necessarily indicate the presence of an addiction.
By revising and clarifying these criteria in DSM-5, we hope to alleviate some of the widespread misunderstanding about
these issues.
