disorder criteria may be endorsed only when there is substantial severity and impairment. The
rate of mental health service use for panic disorder varies across ethnoracial groups.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
The rate of panic disorder is nearly twofold higher in women compared with men. Relapse from
panic disorder also occurs more frequently in adult women compared with men,
240
suggesting that women have a more unstable illness course. Gender differences in clinical course
are also found among adolescents. Panic disorder has a larger impact on health-related quality of
life in women than in men, which may be attributable to greater anxiety sensitivity among some
women or greater comorbidity with agoraphobia and depression. There is some evidence for
sexual dimorphism, with high expression of MAOA-uVNTR alleles potentially acting as a
female-specific risk factor for panic disorder.
Diagnostic Markers
Individuals with panic disorder exhibit an attentional bias to threatening stimuli. Panic attacks
may be provoked by agents with disparate mechanisms of action, such as sodium lactate,
caffeine, isoproterenol, yohimbine, CO2, and cholecystokinin, to a much greater extent in
individuals with panic disorder than in those without it. There is considerable interest in the
relationship between panic disorder and sensitivity to these panic-provoking agents. While none
of the data suggest diagnostic utility, data for sensitivity to respiratory stimulation reflect some
level of specificity for panic disorder and related conditions, such as separation anxiety disorder.
Chronically higher baseline hyperventilation and rate of sighing may occur among individuals
with panic disorder. However, none of these laboratory findings are considered diagnostic of
panic disorder.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Panic attacks and a diagnosis of panic disorder in the past 12 months are related to a higher rate
of suicidal behavior and suicidal thoughts in the past 12 months even when comorbidity and a
history of childhood abuse and other suicide risk factors are taken into account. Approximately
25% of primary care patients with panic disorder report suicidal thoughts. Panic disorder may
increase risk for future suicidal behaviors but not deaths.
Epidemiological survey data of panic attack symptoms show that the cognitive symptoms of
panic (e.g., derealization) may be associated with suicidal thoughts, whereas physical symptoms
(e.g., dizziness, nausea) may be associated with suicidal behaviors.
Functional Consequences of Panic Disorder
Panic disorder is associated with high levels of social, occupational, and physical disability;
considerable economic costs; and the highest number of medical visits among the anxiety
disorders, although the effects are strongest with the presence of agoraphobia. Individuals with
panic disorder may be frequently absent from work or school for doctor and emergency room
