Only limited-symptom panic attacks.
Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition.
Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder.
Other mental disorders with panic attacks as an associated feature (e.g., other anxiety disorders
and psychotic disorders).
visits, which can lead to unemployment or dropping out of school. In older adults, impairment
may be seen in caregiving duties or volunteer activities, and panic disorder is related to lower
health-related quality of life and greater receipt of emergency department services. Full-symptom
panic attacks typically are associated with greater morbidity (e.g., greater health care utilization,
more disability, poorer quality of life) than limited-symptom attacks.
Differential Diagnosis
Panic disorder should not be diagnosed if full-symptom
(unexpected) panic attacks have never been experienced. In the case of only limited-symptom
unexpected panic attacks, an other specified anxiety disorder or unspecified anxiety disorder
diagnosis should be considered.
Panic disorder is not diagnosed if the panic
attacks are judged to be a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
Examples of medical conditions that can cause panic attacks include hyperthyroidism,
hyperparathyroidism, pheochromocytoma, vestibular dysfunctions, seizure
241
disorders, and cardiopulmonary conditions (e.g., arrhythmias, supraventricular tachycardia,
asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD]). Appropriate laboratory tests (e.g.,
serum calcium levels for hyperparathyroidism; Holter monitor for arrhythmias) or physical
examinations (e.g., for cardiac conditions) may be helpful in determining the etiological role of
another medical condition. Features such as onset after age 45 years or the presence of atypical
symptoms during a panic attack (e.g., vertigo, loss of consciousness, loss of bladder or bowel
control, slurred speech, amnesia) suggest the possibility that another medical condition or a
substance may be causing the panic attack symptoms.
Panic disorder is not diagnosed if the panic attacks
are judged to be a direct physiological consequence of a substance. Intoxication with central
nervous system stimulants (e.g., cocaine, amphetamine-type substances, caffeine) or cannabis
and withdrawal from central nervous system depressants (e.g., alcohol, barbiturates) can
precipitate a panic attack.
However, if panic attacks continue to occur outside of the context of substance use (e.g., long
after the effects of intoxication or withdrawal have ended), a diagnosis of panic disorder should
be considered. In addition, because panic disorder may precede substance use in some
individuals and may be associated with increased substance use, especially for purposes of self-
medication, a detailed history should be taken to determine if the individual had panic attacks
prior to excessive substance use. If this is the case, a diagnosis of panic disorder should be
considered in addition to a diagnosis of substance use disorder. Features such as onset after age
45 years or the presence of atypical symptoms during a panic attack (e.g., vertigo, loss of
consciousness, loss of bladder or bowel control, slurred speech, amnesia) suggest the possibility
that another medical condition or a substance may be causing the panic attack symptoms.
Panic attacks that occur as a symptom of other anxiety disorders are expected (e.g., triggered by
