social situations in social anxiety disorder, by phobic objects or situations in specific phobia or
agoraphobia, by worry in generalized anxiety disorder, by separation from home or attachment
figures in separation anxiety disorder) and thus would not meet criteria for panic disorder. (Note:
Sometimes an unexpected panic attack is associated with the onset of another anxiety disorder,
but then the attacks become expected, whereas panic disorder is characterized by recurrent
unexpected panic attacks.) If the panic attacks occur only in response to specific triggers, then
only the relevant anxiety disorder is assigned. However, if the individual experiences unexpected
panic attacks as well and shows persistent concern and worry or behavioral change because of
the attacks, then an additional diagnosis of panic disorder should be considered.
Comorbidity
Panic disorder infrequently occurs in clinical settings in the absence of other psychopathology. In
the general population, 80% of individuals with panic disorder had a lifetime comorbid mental
diagnosis. The prevalence of panic disorder is elevated in individuals with other disorders,
particularly other anxiety disorders (and especially agoraphobia), major depressive disorder,
bipolar I and bipolar II disorder, and possibly mild alcohol use disorder. While panic disorder
occasionally has an earlier age at onset than the comorbid disorder(s), onset often occurs after the
comorbid disorder and may be seen as a severity marker of the comorbid illness.
Reported lifetime rates of comorbidity between major depressive disorder and panic disorder
vary widely, ranging from 10% to 65% in individuals with panic disorder. In approximately one-
third of individuals with both disorders, the depression precedes the onset of panic disorder. In
the remaining two-thirds, depression occurs coincident with or following the onset of panic
disorder. A subset of individuals with panic disorder develop a
242
substance-related disorder, which for some represents an attempt to treat their anxiety with
alcohol or medications. Comorbidity with other anxiety disorders and illness anxiety disorder is
also common.
Panic disorder is significantly comorbid with numerous general medical symptoms and
conditions, including, but not limited to, dizziness, cardiac arrhythmias, hyperthyroidism,
asthma, COPD, and irritable bowel syndrome. However, the nature of the association (e.g., cause
and effect) between panic disorder and these conditions remains unclear. Although mitral valve
prolapse and thyroid disease are more common among individuals with panic disorder than in the
general population, the increases in prevalence are not consistent.
Panic Attack Specifier
Note: Symptoms are presented for the purpose of identifying a panic attack;
however, panic attack is not a mental disorder and cannot be coded. Panic attacks
can occur in the context of any anxiety disorder as well as other mental disorders
(e.g., depressive disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder, substance use disorders)
and some medical conditions (e.g., cardiac, respiratory, vestibular, gastrointestinal).
When the presence of a panic attack is identified, it should be noted as a specifier
