(e.g., “posttraumatic stress disorder with panic attacks”). For panic disorder, the
presence of panic attack is contained within the criteria for the disorder and panic
attack is not used as a specifier.
An abrupt surge of intense fear or intense discomfort that reaches a peak within
minutes, and during which time four (or more) of the following symptoms occur:
Note: The abrupt surge can occur from a calm state or an anxious state.
1. 
1. Palpitations, pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate.
2. Sweating.
3. Trembling or shaking.
4. Sensations of shortness of breath or smothering.
5. Feelings of choking.
6. Chest pain or discomfort.
7. Nausea or abdominal distress.
8. Feeling dizzy, unsteady, light-headed, or faint.
9. Chills or heat sensations.
10. Paresthesias (numbness or tingling sensations).
11. Derealization (feelings of unreality) or depersonalization (being detached from
oneself).
12. Fear of losing control or “going crazy.”
13. Fear of dying.
Note: Culture-specific symptoms (e.g., tinnitus, neck soreness, headache,
uncontrollable screaming or crying) may be seen. Such symptoms should not count
as one of the four required symptoms.
Features
The essential feature of a panic attack is an abrupt surge of intense fear or intense discomfort that
reaches a peak within minutes and during which time 4 or more of 13 physical and cognitive
symptoms occur. Eleven of these 13 symptoms are physical (e.g., palpitations, sweating), while 2
are cognitive (i.e., fear of losing control or going crazy, fear of dying). “Fear of going crazy” is a
colloquialism often used by individuals with panic attacks and is not intended as a pejorative or
diagnostic term. The term within minutes means that the time to peak intensity is literally only a
few minutes. A panic attack can arise from either a calm state or an
243
anxious state, and time to peak intensity should be assessed independently of any preceding
anxiety. That is, the start of the panic attack is the point at which there is an abrupt increase in
discomfort rather than the point at which anxiety first developed. Likewise, a panic attack can
return to either an anxious state or a calm state and possibly peak again. A panic attack is
distinguished from ongoing anxiety by its time to peak intensity, which occurs within minutes;
its discrete nature; and its typically greater severity. Attacks that meet all other criteria but have
fewer than four physical and/or cognitive symptoms are referred to as limited-symptom attacks.
