There are two characteristic types of panic attacks: expected and unexpected. Expected panic
attacks are attacks for which there is an obvious cue or trigger, such as situations in which panic
attacks have typically occurred. Unexpected panic attacks are those for which there is no obvious
cue or trigger at the time of occurrence (e.g., when relaxing or out of sleep [nocturnal panic
attack]). The determination of whether panic attacks are expected or unexpected is made by the
clinician, who makes this judgment based on a combination of careful questioning as to the
sequence of events preceding or leading up to the attack and the individual’s own judgment of
whether the attack seemed to occur for no apparent reason. Panic attacks can occur in the context
of any mental disorder (e.g., anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, bipolar disorders, eating
disorders, obsessive-compulsive and related disorders, personality disorders, psychotic disorders,
substance use disorders) and some medical conditions (e.g., cardiac, respiratory, vestibular,
gastrointestinal), with the majority of presentations never meeting criteria for panic disorder.
Recurrent unexpected panic attacks are required for a diagnosis of panic disorder.
Associated Features
One type of unexpected panic attack is a nocturnal panic attack (i.e., waking from sleep in a
state of panic), which differs from panicking after fully waking from sleep.
Prevalence
In the general population, 12-month prevalence estimates for panic attacks in Spain and in the
United States range from 9.5% to 11.2% in adults. Twelve-month prevalence estimates do not
appear to differ significantly among African Americans, Asian Americans, and Latinx.
Approximately 8.5% of American Indians report a lifetime history of panic attacks. Lifetime
prevalence rates of panic attacks cross-nationally are 13.2%. Women are more frequently
affected than men, although this gender difference is more pronounced for panic disorder. Panic
attacks can occur in children but are relatively rare until the age of puberty, when the prevalence
rates increase. The prevalence declines in older individuals, possibly reflecting diminishing
severity to subclinical levels.
Development and Course
The mean age at onset for panic attacks in the United States is approximately 22–23 years among
adults. However, the course of panic attacks is likely influenced by the course of any co-
occurring mental disorder(s) and stressful life events. Panic attacks are uncommon, and
unexpected panic attacks are rare, in preadolescent children. Adolescents might be less willing
than adults to openly discuss panic attacks, even though they present with episodes of intense
fear or discomfort. Lower prevalence of panic attacks in older individuals may be related to a
weaker autonomic response to emotional states relative to younger individuals. Older individuals
may be less inclined to use the word “fear” and more inclined to use the word “discomfort” to
describe panic attacks. Older individuals with “panicky feelings” may have a hybrid of limited-
symptom attacks and generalized anxiety. In addition, older individuals tend to attribute panic
attacks to certain situations that are stressful (e.g., medical procedures, social settings) and may
retrospectively endorse explanations for the panic attack even if it was unexpected in the
moment. This may result in under-endorsement of unexpected panic attacks in older individuals.
