Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
244
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Negative affectivity (neuroticism) (i.e., proneness to experiencing negative
emotions), anxiety sensitivity (i.e., the disposition to believe that symptoms of anxiety are
harmful), behavioral inhibition, and harm avoidance are risk factors for the onset of panic
attacks. History of “fearful spells” (i.e., limited-symptom attacks that do not meet full criteria for
a panic attack) may be a risk factor for later panic attacks.
Smoking is a risk factor for panic attacks. Most individuals report identifiable
stressors in the months before their first panic attack (e.g., interpersonal stressors and stressors
related to physical well-being, such as negative experiences with illicit or prescription drugs,
disease, or death in the family). Separation from parents, overprotective parenting, and parental
rejection are risk factors for panic attacks.
Individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who report low
perceptions of control over the disease and negative beliefs about the consequences of
unpredictable breathless attacks are more likely to have panic symptoms.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Cultural interpretations may influence the determination of panic attacks as expected or
unexpected. Culture-specific symptoms (e.g., tinnitus, neck soreness, headache, and
uncontrollable screaming or crying) may be seen; however, such symptoms should not count as
one of the four required symptoms. Frequency of each of the 13 symptoms varies cross-
culturally (e.g., higher rates of paresthesias in African Americans, of dizziness in several Asian
groups, and of trembling in non-Latinx Whites). Cultural concepts of distress also influence the
cross-cultural presentation of panic attacks, resulting in different symptom profiles across
different cultural groups. Examples include khyâl (wind) attacks, a Cambodian cultural
syndrome involving dizziness, tinnitus, and neck soreness; and trúng gió (wind-related) attacks,
a Vietnamese cultural syndrome associated with headaches. Cultural explanatory models can
heighten the salience of specific panic symptoms. For example, traditional Cambodian views
about the abnormal circulation of khyâl in the body are associated with the perceived
dangerousness of some symptoms (e.g., neck soreness), which can trigger catastrophic
cognitions and panic attacks. Ataque de nervios (attack of nerves) is a cultural syndrome among
Latin Americans that may involve trembling, uncontrollable screaming or crying, aggressive or
suicidal behavior, and depersonalization or derealization, and which may be experienced for
longer than only a few minutes. Some clinical presentations of ataque de nervios fulfill criteria
for conditions other than panic attack (e.g., other specified dissociative disorder). Also, cultural
expectations may influence the classification of panic attacks as expected or unexpected, as
cultural syndromes may create fear of certain situations, ranging from interpersonal arguments
(associated with ataque de nervios), to types of exertion (associated with khyâl attacks), to
atmospheric wind (associated with trúng gió attacks). Clarification of the details of cultural
attributions may aid in distinguishing expected and unexpected panic attacks. For more
information about cultural concepts of distress, see the “Culture and Psychiatric Diagnosis”
chapter in Section III.
