Other paroxysmal episodes (e.g., “anger attacks”).
Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Panic attacks are more common in women than in men. Among those who report panic attacks,
women are more likely to endorse symptoms of shortness of breath and nausea but less likely to
endorse sweating than are men.
Diagnostic Markers
Physiological recordings of naturally occurring panic attacks in individuals with panic disorder
indicate abrupt surges of arousal, usually of heart rate, that reach a peak within
245
minutes and subside within minutes, and for a proportion of these individuals the panic attack
may be preceded by cardiorespiratory instabilities. Panic attacks are characterized by heart rate
and tidal volume increases and a drop in pCO2.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Panic attacks are related to a higher rate of suicide attempts and suicidal thoughts even when
comorbidity and other suicide risk factors are taken into account.
Functional Consequences of Panic Attacks
In the context of co-occurring mental disorders, including anxiety disorders, depressive
disorders, bipolar disorder, substance use disorders, psychotic disorders, and personality
disorders, panic attacks are associated with increased symptom severity, higher rates of
comorbidity, and poorer treatment response. Recurrent panic attacks in particular are associated
with increased odds of many mental health diagnoses. Furthermore, more severe panic attacks
are associated with a greater likelihood of developing panic disorder and a variety of other
mental health conditions, as well as greater persistence of mental illness and impaired
functioning. Also, full-symptom panic attacks typically are associated with greater morbidity
(e.g., greater health care utilization, more disability, poorer quality of life) than limited-symptom
attacks.
Differential Diagnosis
Panic attacks should not be diagnosed if the
episodes do not involve the essential feature of an abrupt surge of intense fear or intense
discomfort, but rather other emotional states (e.g., anger, grief).
Medical conditions that can cause or be
misdiagnosed 
as 
panic 
attacks 
include 
hyperthyroidism, 
hyperparathyroidism,
pheochromocytoma, vestibular dysfunctions, seizure disorders, and cardiopulmonary conditions
(e.g., arrhythmias, supraventricular tachycardia, asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease).
Appropriate laboratory tests (e.g., serum calcium levels for hyperparathyroidism; Holter monitor
for arrhythmias) or physical examinations (e.g., for cardiac conditions) may be helpful in
determining the etiological role of another medical condition.
