Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder.
Panic disorder.
F40.00
Intoxication with central nervous system stimulants
(e.g., cocaine, amphetamine-type substances, caffeine) or cannabis and withdrawal from central
nervous system depressants (e.g., alcohol, barbiturates) can precipitate a panic attack. A detailed
history should be taken to determine if the individual had panic attacks prior to excessive
substance use. Features such as onset after age 45 years or the presence of atypical symptoms
during a panic attack (e.g., vertigo, loss of consciousness, loss of bladder or bowel control,
slurred speech, or amnesia) suggest the possibility that a medical condition or a substance may
be causing the panic attack symptoms.
Repeated unexpected panic attacks are required but are not sufficient for the
diagnosis of panic disorder (i.e., full diagnostic criteria for panic disorder must be met).
Comorbidity
Panic attacks are associated with increased likelihood of various comorbid mental disorders,
including anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, bipolar disorders, impulse-control disorders,
and substance use disorders. Panic attacks are associated with increased likelihood of later
developing anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, bipolar disorders, alcohol use disorder, and
possibly other disorders.
246
Agoraphobia
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Marked fear or anxiety about two (or more) of the following five situations:
1. Using public transportation (e.g., automobiles, buses, trains, ships, planes).
2. Being in open spaces (e.g., parking lots, marketplaces, bridges).
3. Being in enclosed places (e.g., shops, theaters, cinemas).
4. Standing in line or being in a crowd.
5. Being outside of the home alone.
B. The individual fears or avoids these situations because of thoughts that escape
might be difficult or help might not be available in the event of developing panic-
like symptoms or other incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms (e.g., fear of
falling in the elderly; fear of incontinence).
C. The agoraphobic situations almost always provoke fear or anxiety.
D. The agoraphobic situations are actively avoided, require the presence of a
companion, or are endured with intense fear or anxiety.
E. The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual danger posed by the
agoraphobic situations and to the sociocultural context.
F. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, typically lasting for 6 months or
