more.
G. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance causes clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
H. If another medical condition (e.g., inflammatory bowel disease, Parkinson’s
disease) is present, the fear, anxiety, or avoidance is clearly excessive.
I. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is not better explained by the symptoms of
another mental disorder—for example, the symptoms are not confined to specific
phobia, situational type; do not involve only social situations (as in social anxiety
disorder); and are not related exclusively to obsessions (as in obsessive-
compulsive disorder), perceived defects or flaws in physical appearance (as in
body dysmorphic disorder), reminders of traumatic events (as in posttraumatic
stress disorder), or fear of separation (as in separation anxiety disorder).
Note: Agoraphobia is diagnosed irrespective of the presence of panic disorder. If an
individual’s presentation meets criteria for panic disorder and agoraphobia, both
diagnoses should be assigned.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of agoraphobia is marked fear or anxiety triggered by the real or anticipated
exposure to a wide range of situations (Criterion A). The diagnosis requires endorsement of
symptoms occurring in at least two of the following five situations: 1) using public
transportation, such as automobiles, buses, trains, ships, or planes; 2) being in open spaces, such
as parking lots, marketplaces, or bridges; 3) being in enclosed spaces, such as shops, theaters, or
cinemas; 4) standing in line or being in a crowd; or 5) being outside of the home alone. The
examples for each situation are not exhaustive; other situations may be feared. When
experiencing fear and anxiety cued by such situations, individuals typically experience thoughts
that something terrible might happen (Criterion B). Individuals frequently believe that escape
from such situations might be difficult (e.g., “can’t get out of here”) or that help might be
unavailable (e.g., “there is nobody to help me”) when panic-like symptoms or other
incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms occur. “Panic-like symptoms” refer to any of the 13
symptoms included in the criteria for panic attack, such as dizziness, faintness, and fear of dying.
“Other incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms” include
247
symptoms such as vomiting and inflammatory bowel symptoms, as well as, in older adults, a fear
of falling or, in children, a sense of disorientation and getting lost.
The amount of fear experienced may vary with proximity to the feared situation and may
occur in anticipation of or in the actual presence of the agoraphobic situation. Also, the fear or
anxiety may take the form of a full- or limited-symptom panic attack (i.e., an expected panic
attack). Fear or anxiety is evoked nearly every time the individual comes into contact with the
feared situation (Criterion C). Thus, an individual who becomes anxious only occasionally in an
agoraphobic situation (e.g., becomes anxious when standing in line on only one out of every five
occasions) would not be diagnosed with agoraphobia. The individual actively avoids the
