situation, requires the presence of a companion, or, if he or she either is unable or decides not to
avoid it, the situation evokes intense fear or anxiety (Criterion D). Active avoidance means the
individual is currently behaving in ways that are intentionally designed to prevent or minimize
contact with agoraphobic situations. Avoidance can be behavioral (e.g., changing daily routines,
choosing a job nearby to avoid using public transportation, arranging for food delivery to avoid
entering shops and supermarkets) as well as cognitive (e.g., using distraction to get through
agoraphobic situations) in nature. The avoidance can become so severe that the individual is
completely homebound. Often, an individual is better able to confront a feared situation when
accompanied by a companion, such as a partner, friend, or health professional. Also, the
individual may employ safety behaviors (e.g., sitting near exits when taking public transportation
or at the movies) to better endure such situations.
The fear, anxiety, or avoidance must be out of proportion to the actual danger posed by the
agoraphobic situations and to the sociocultural context (Criterion E). Differentiating
disproportionate, clinically significant agoraphobic fears from reasonable fears (e.g., not wanting
to leave the house during a bad storm) or from situations that are deemed dangerous (e.g.,
walking in a parking lot or using public transportation in a high-crime area) is important for a
number of reasons. First, what constitutes avoidance may be difficult to judge across cultures and
sociocultural contexts (e.g., it is socioculturally appropriate for orthodox Muslim women in
certain parts of the world to avoid leaving the house alone, and thus such avoidance would not be
considered indicative of agoraphobia). Second, older adults are likely to overattribute their fears
to age-related constraints and are less likely to judge their fears as being out of proportion to the
actual risk. Third, individuals with agoraphobia are likely to overestimate danger in relation to
panic-like or other bodily symptoms. Agoraphobia should be diagnosed only if the fear, anxiety,
or avoidance is persistent (Criterion F) and if it causes clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion G). The
duration of “typically lasting for 6 months or more” is meant to exclude individuals with short-
lived, transient problems.
Associated Features
In its most severe forms, agoraphobia can cause individuals to become completely homebound,
unable to leave their home and dependent on others for services or assistance to provide even for
basic needs. Demoralization and depressive symptoms, as well as abuse of alcohol and sedative
medication as inappropriate self-medication strategies, are common.
Prevalence
Every year approximately 1%–1.7% of adolescents and adults worldwide have symptoms that
meet diagnostic criteria for agoraphobia. Women are twice as likely as men to experience
agoraphobia. Agoraphobia may occur in childhood, but incidence peaks in late adolescence and
early adulthood. Studies have shown the 12-month prevalence in individuals living in the United
States who are older than 65 years is 0.4% and 0.5% among individuals in Europe and North
America older than 55 years. Approximately 0.2%–0.8% of
248
