Enhanced specificity for major and mild neurocognitive disorders. Given the explosion in neuroscience,
neuropsychology, and brain imaging over the past 20 years, it was critical to convey the current state-of-the-art in the
diagnosis of specific types of disorders that were previously referred to as the “dementias” or organic brain diseases.
Biological markers identified by imaging for vascular and traumatic brain disorders and
xxv
specific molecular genetic findings for rare variants of Alzheimer’s disease and Huntington’s disease have greatly advanced
clinical diagnoses, and these disorders and others have now been separated into specific subtypes.
Transition in conceptualizing personality disorders. Although the benefits of a more dimensional approach to personality
disorders have been identified in previous editions, the transition from a categorical diagnostic system of individual
disorders to one based on the relative distribution of personality traits has not been widely accepted. In DSM-5, the
categorical personality disorders are virtually unchanged from the previous edition. However, an alternative “hybrid” model
has been proposed in Section III to guide future research that separates interpersonal functioning assessments and the
expression of pathological personality traits for six specific disorders. A more dimensional profile of personality trait
expression is also proposed for a trait-specified approach.
Section III: new disorders and features. A new section (Section III) has been added to highlight disorders that require
further study but are not sufficiently well established to be a part of the official classification of mental disorders for routine
clinical use. Dimensional measures of symptom severity in 13 symptom domains have also been incorporated to allow for
the measurement of symptom levels of varying severity across all diagnostic groups. Likewise, the WHO Disability
Assessment Schedule (WHODAS), a standard method for assessing global disability levels for mental disorders that is based
on the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) and is applicable in all of medicine, has been
provided to replace the more limited Global Assessment of Functioning scale. It is our hope that as these measures are
implemented over time, they will provide greater accuracy and flexibility in the clinical description of individual
symptomatic presentations and associated disability during diagnostic assessments.
Online enhancements. DSM-5 features online supplemental information. Additional cross-cutting and diagnostic severity
measures are available online (www.psychiatry.org/dsm5), linked to the relevant disorders. In addition, the Cultural
Formulation Interview, Cultural Formulation Interview—Informant Version, and supplementary modules to the core
Cultural Formulation Interview are also included online at www.psychiatry.org/dsm5.
These innovations were designed by the leading authorities on mental disorders in the world
and were implemented on the basis of their expert review, public commentary, and independent
peer review. The 13 work groups, under the direction of the DSM-5 Task Force, in conjunction
with other review bodies and, eventually, the APA Board of Trustees, collectively represent the
global expertise of the specialty. This effort was supported by an extensive base of advisors and
by the professional staff of the APA Division of Research; the names of everyone involved are
too numerous to mention here but are listed in the Appendix. We owe tremendous thanks to
those who devoted countless hours and invaluable expertise to this effort to improve the
diagnosis of mental disorders.
We would especially like to acknowledge the chairs, text coordinators, and members of the
13 work groups, listed in the front of the manual, who spent many hours in this volunteer effort
to improve the scientific basis of clinical practice over a sustained 6-year period. Susan K.
Schultz, M.D., who served as text editor, worked tirelessly with Emily A. Kuhl, Ph.D., senior
science writer and DSM-5 staff text editor, to coordinate the efforts of the work groups into a
