Temperamental.
the adult population in various countries has a past 12-month diagnosis of agoraphobia without
panic disorder.
Development and Course
The percentage of individuals with agoraphobia reporting panic attacks or panic disorder
preceding the onset of agoraphobia ranges from 30% in community samples to more than 50% in
clinical samples.
In two-thirds of all cases of agoraphobia, initial onset is before age 35 years, with 21 years
the mean age at onset, although age at onset of agoraphobia without preceding panic attacks or
panic disorder is 25–29 years. First onset in childhood is rare. There is a substantial incidence
risk in adolescence and early adulthood, with indications for a second high incidence risk phase
after age 40 years. Approximately 10% of older adults with agoraphobia reported their first
episode of agoraphobia occurring after age 65.
The course of agoraphobia is typically persistent and chronic. Complete remission is rare
(10%), unless the agoraphobia is treated. Individuals with comorbid panic disorder and
agoraphobia are more likely to experience recurrence of symptoms after a period of remission if
they had an earlier age at onset (< 20 years old). With more severe agoraphobia, rates of full
remission decrease, whereas rates of relapse and chronicity increase. Approximately 36% of
individuals with agoraphobia who achieve remission eventually experience relapse. A range of
other disorders, in particular other anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, substance use
disorders, and personality disorders, may complicate the course of agoraphobia. The long-term
course and outcome of agoraphobia are associated with substantially elevated risk of secondary
major depressive disorder, persistent depressive disorder, and substance use disorders.
The clinical features of agoraphobia are relatively consistent across the life span, although
the type of agoraphobic situations triggering fear, anxiety, or avoidance, as well as the type of
cognitions, may vary. For example, in children, being outside of the home alone is the most
frequent situation feared, whereas in older adults, being in shops, standing in line, and being in
open spaces are most often feared. Also, cognitions often pertain to becoming lost (in children),
to experiencing panic-like symptoms (in adults), to falling (in older adults).
The apparent low prevalence of agoraphobia in children could reflect difficulties in symptom
reporting, and thus assessments in young children may require solicitation of information from
multiple sources, including parents or teachers. Adolescents, particularly boys, may be less
willing than adults to openly discuss agoraphobic fears and avoidance; however, agoraphobia
can occur before adulthood and should be assessed in children and adolescents. In older adults,
comorbid somatic symptom disorder, having medical complications, and motor disturbances
(e.g., a sense of falling) are frequently mentioned by individuals as the reason for their fear and
avoidance. In these instances, care is to be taken in evaluating whether the fear and avoidance are
out of proportion to the real danger involved.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Behavioral inhibition, negative affectivity (neuroticism), anxiety sensitivity, and
trait anxiety are closely associated with agoraphobia but are relevant to most anxiety disorders
(specific phobia, social anxiety disorder, panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder). Anxiety
sensitivity (the disposition to believe that symptoms of anxiety are harmful) is also characteristic
