Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Specific phobia, situational type.
of individuals with agoraphobia.
Negative events in childhood (e.g., separation, death of parent) and other stressful
events, such as being attacked or mugged, are associated with the onset of agoraphobia.
Furthermore, individuals with agoraphobia describe the family climate and child-rearing
behavior as being characterized by reduced warmth and increased overprotection.
249
Heritability for agoraphobia is 61%. Of the various phobias,
agoraphobia has the strongest and most specific association with the genetic factor that
represents proneness to phobias. Family history of anxiety disorders is associated with an earlier
age at onset of agoraphobia (< 27 years old), and family history of panic disorder in particular is
associated with agoraphobia.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Women have different patterns of comorbid disorders than men. Consistent with gender
differences in the prevalence of mental disorders, men have higher rates of comorbid substance
use disorders.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Approximately 15% of individuals with agoraphobia report suicidal thoughts or behavior. For
individuals with panic disorder, symptoms of agoraphobia may be a risk factor for suicidal
thoughts.
Functional Consequences of Agoraphobia
Like most other anxiety disorders, agoraphobia is associated with considerable impairment and
disability in terms of role functioning, work productivity, and disability days. Agoraphobia
severity is a strong determinant of the degree of disability, irrespective of the presence of
comorbid panic disorder, panic attacks, and other comorbid conditions. Individuals with
agoraphobia can be completely homebound or unable to work. Individuals with panic disorder
with agoraphobia who have an early course of onset (< age 20 years) are less likely to be
married.
Differential Diagnosis
Differentiating agoraphobia from situational specific phobia can
be challenging in some cases, because these conditions share several symptom characteristics
and criteria. Specific phobia, situational type, should be diagnosed versus agoraphobia if the fear,
anxiety, or avoidance is limited to one of the agoraphobic situations. Requiring fears from two or
more of the agoraphobic situations is a robust means for differentiating agoraphobia from
specific phobias, particularly the situational subtype. Additional differentiating features include
the content of the individual’s cognitions. Thus, if the situation is feared for reasons other than
panic-like symptoms or other incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms (e.g., fears of being
directly harmed by the situation itself, such as fear of the plane crashing for individuals who fear
