Separation anxiety disorder.
Social anxiety disorder.
Panic disorder.
Acute stress disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder.
Major depressive disorder.
Avoidance related to other medical conditions.
flying), then a diagnosis of specific phobia may be more appropriate.
Separation anxiety disorder can be best differentiated from
agoraphobia by examining the individual’s cognitions. In separation anxiety disorder, the
thoughts are about detachment from significant others and the home environment (i.e., parents or
other attachment figures), whereas in agoraphobia the focus is on panic-like symptoms or other
incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms in the feared situations.
Agoraphobia should be differentiated from social anxiety disorder based
primarily on the situational clusters that trigger fear, anxiety, or avoidance and the individual’s
cognitions. In social anxiety disorder, the focus is on fear of being negatively evaluated.
When criteria for panic disorder are met, agoraphobia should not be diagnosed if
the avoidance behaviors associated with the panic attacks do not extend to avoidance of two or
more agoraphobic situations.
250
Acute stress disorder and posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) can be differentiated from agoraphobia by examining whether the fear,
anxiety, or avoidance is related only to situations that remind the individual of a traumatic event.
If the fear, anxiety, or avoidance is restricted to trauma reminders, and if the avoidance behavior
does not extend to two or more agoraphobic situations, then a diagnosis of agoraphobia is not
warranted.
In major depressive disorder, the individual may avoid leaving home
because of apathy, loss of energy, low self-esteem, and anhedonia. If the avoidance is unrelated
to fears of panic-like or other incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms, then agoraphobia should
not be diagnosed.
Individuals with certain medical conditions may
avoid situations because of realistic concerns about being incapacitated (e.g., fainting in an
individual with transient ischemic attacks) or being embarrassed (e.g., diarrhea in an individual
with Crohn’s disease). The diagnosis of agoraphobia should be given only when the fear or
avoidance is clearly in excess of that usually associated with these medical conditions.
Comorbidity
About 90% of individuals with agoraphobia also have other mental disorders. The most frequent
additional diagnoses are other anxiety disorders (e.g., specific phobias, panic disorder, social
anxiety disorder), depressive disorders (major depressive disorder), PTSD, and alcohol use
disorder. Whereas other anxiety disorders (e.g., separation anxiety disorder, specific phobias,
panic disorder) frequently precede onset of agoraphobia, depressive disorders and substance use
disorders typically occur secondary to agoraphobia. In some individuals, a substance use disorder
precedes agoraphobia. Individuals with comorbid agoraphobia and major depressive disorder
tend to have a more treatment-resistant course of agoraphobia relative to individuals with
agoraphobia alone.
