frequency of the anxiety and worry is out of proportion to the actual likelihood or impact of the
anticipated event. The individual finds it difficult to control the worry and to keep worrisome
thoughts from interfering with attention to tasks at hand. Adults with generalized anxiety
disorder often worry about everyday, routine life circumstances, such as possible job
responsibilities, health and finances, the health of family members, misfortune to their children,
or minor matters (e.g., doing household chores or being late for appointments). Children with
generalized anxiety disorder tend to worry excessively about their competence or the quality of
their performance. During the course of the disorder, the focus of worry may shift from one
concern to another.
Several features distinguish generalized anxiety disorder from nonpathological anxiety. First,
the worries associated with generalized anxiety disorder are excessive and typically interfere
significantly with psychosocial functioning, whereas the worries of everyday life are not
excessive and are perceived as more manageable and may be put off when more pressing matters
arise. Second, the worries associated with generalized anxiety disorder are more pervasive,
pronounced, and distressing; have longer duration; and frequently occur without precipitants.
The greater the range of life circumstances about which a person worries (e.g., finances,
children’s safety, job performance), the more likely his or her symptoms are to meet criteria for
generalized anxiety disorder. Third, everyday worries are much less likely to be accompanied by
physical symptoms (e.g., restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge). Individuals with
generalized anxiety disorder report subjective distress as a result of constant worry and related
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
The anxiety and worry are accompanied by at least three of the following additional
symptoms: restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge, being easily fatigued, difficulty
concentrating or mind going blank, irritability, muscle tension, and disturbed sleep, although
only one additional symptom is required in children.
Associated Features
Associated with muscle tension, there may be trembling, twitching, feeling shaky, and muscle
aches or soreness. Many individuals with generalized anxiety disorder also experience somatic
symptoms (e.g., sweating, nausea, diarrhea) and an exaggerated startle response. Symptoms of
autonomic hyperarousal (e.g., accelerated heart rate, shortness of breath, dizziness) are less
prominent in generalized anxiety disorder than in other anxiety disorders, such as panic disorder.
Other conditions that may be associated with stress (e.g., irritable bowel syndrome, headaches)
frequently accompany generalized anxiety disorder.
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence of generalized anxiety disorder is 0.9% among adolescents and 2.9%
among adults in the general community of the United States. The mean 12-month
252
prevalence for the disorder around the world is 1.3%, with a range of 0.2% to 4.3%. The lifetime
morbid risk in the United States is 9.0%. Women and adolescent girls are at least twice as likely
as men and adolescent boys to experience generalized anxiety disorder. The 12-month
