Temperamental.
Environmental.
prevalence in older adults including individuals age 75 years and older ranges from 2.8% to
3.1% in the United States, Israel, and European countries.
Individuals of European descent tend to have symptoms that meet criteria for generalized
anxiety disorder more frequently than do individuals of Asian and African descent. Furthermore,
individuals from high-income countries are more likely than individuals from low- and middle-
income countries to report that they have experienced symptoms that meet criteria for
generalized anxiety disorder in their lifetime.
Development and Course
Many individuals with generalized anxiety disorder report that they have felt anxious and
nervous all their lives. The mean age at onset for generalized anxiety disorder in North America
is 35 years, later than that for the other anxiety disorders; the disorder rarely occurs prior to
adolescence. However, age at onset is spread over a very broad range and tends to be older in
lower-income countries worldwide. The symptoms of excessive worry and anxiety may occur
early in life but are then manifested as an anxious temperament. Generalized anxiety disorder
symptoms tend to be chronic and wax and wane across the life span, fluctuating between
syndromal and subsyndromal forms of the disorder. Course is more persistent in lower-income
countries, but impairment tends to be higher in high-income countries. Rates of full remission are
very low.
The earlier in life individuals have symptoms that meet criteria for generalized anxiety
disorder, the more comorbidity and impairment they tend to have. Younger adults experience
greater severity of symptoms than do older adults.
The clinical expression of generalized anxiety disorder is relatively consistent across the life
span. The primary difference across age groups is in the content of the individual’s worry; thus,
the content of an individual’s worry tends to be age appropriate.
In children and adolescents with generalized anxiety disorder, the anxieties and worries often
concern the quality of their performance or competence at school or in sporting events, even
when their performance is not being evaluated by others. There may be excessive concerns about
punctuality. They may also worry about catastrophic events, such as earthquakes or nuclear war.
Children with the disorder may be overly conforming, perfectionistic, and unsure of themselves
and may tend to redo tasks because of excessive dissatisfaction with less-than-perfect
performance. They may be overzealous in seeking reassurance and approval and require
excessive reassurance about their performance and other things they are worried about.
In the elderly, the advent of chronic physical disease can be a potent issue for excessive
worry. In the frail elderly, worries about safety—and especially about falling—may limit
activities.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Behavioral inhibition, negative affectivity (neuroticism), harm avoidance,
reward dependence, and attentional bias to threat have been associated with generalized anxiety
disorder.
Childhood adversities and parenting practices (e.g., overprotection, overcontrol,
reinforcement of avoidance) have been associated with generalized anxiety disorder.
