Genetic and physiological. One-third of the risk of experiencing generalized anxiety disorder is
genetic, and these genetic factors overlap with the risk of negative affectivity (neuroticism) and
are shared with other anxiety and mood disorders, particularly major depressive disorder.
253
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
There is considerable cultural variation in the expression of generalized anxiety disorder. For
example, in some cultural contexts, somatic symptoms predominate in the expression of the
disorder, whereas in other cultural contexts cognitive symptoms tend to predominate. This
difference may be more evident on initial presentation than subsequently, as more symptoms are
reported over time. There is no information as to whether the propensity for excessive worrying
is related to cultural background, although the topic being worried about can be culturally
specific. It is important to consider the social and cultural context when evaluating whether
worries about certain situations are excessive. In the United States, higher prevalence is
associated with exposure to racism and ethnic discrimination and, for some ethnoracial groups,
with being born in the United States.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
In clinical settings, generalized anxiety disorder is diagnosed somewhat more frequently in
women than in men (about 55%–60% of those presenting with the disorder are women). In
epidemiological studies, approximately two-thirds are women. Women and men who experience
generalized anxiety disorder appear to have similar symptoms but demonstrate different patterns
of comorbidity consistent with gender differences in the prevalence of disorders. In women,
comorbidity is largely confined to the anxiety disorders and unipolar depression, whereas in
men, comorbidity is more likely to extend to the substance use disorders as well.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Generalized anxiety disorder is associated with increased suicidal thoughts and behavior, even
after adjustment for comorbid disorders and stressful life events. Psychological autopsy studies
show that generalized anxiety disorder is the most frequent anxiety disorder diagnosed in
suicides. Both subthreshold and threshold generalized anxiety disorder occurring in the past year
may be associated with suicidal thoughts.
Functional Consequences of Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Excessive worrying impairs the individual’s capacity to do things quickly and efficiently,
whether at home or at work. The worrying takes time and energy; the associated symptoms of
muscle tension and feeling keyed up or on edge, tiredness, difficulty concentrating, and disturbed
sleep contribute to the impairment. Importantly the excessive worrying may impair the ability of
individuals with generalized anxiety disorder to encourage confidence in their children.
Generalized anxiety disorder is associated with significant disability and distress that is
independent of comorbid disorders, and most non-institutionalized adults with the disorder are
moderately to seriously disabled. Generalized anxiety disorder accounts for 110 million
