Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition.
Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder.
Social anxiety disorder.
Separation anxiety disorder.
Panic disorder.
Illness anxiety disorder and somatic symptom disorder.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Posttraumatic stress disorder and adjustment disorders.
disability days per annum in the U.S. population. Generalized anxiety disorder is also linked to
decreased work performance, increased medical resource use, and increased risk for coronary
morbidity.
Differential Diagnosis
The diagnosis of anxiety disorder due to another
medical condition should be assigned if the individual’s anxiety and worry are judged, based on
history, laboratory findings, or physical examination, to be a physiological effect of another
specific medical condition (e.g., pheochromocytoma, hyperthyroidism).
254
A substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder is
distinguished from generalized anxiety disorder by the fact that a substance or medication (e.g., a
drug of abuse, exposure to a toxin) is judged to be etiologically related to the anxiety. For
example, severe anxiety that occurs only in the context of heavy coffee consumption would be
diagnosed as caffeine-induced anxiety disorder.
Individuals with social anxiety disorder often have anticipatory anxiety
that is focused on upcoming social situations in which they must perform or be evaluated by
others, whereas individuals with generalized anxiety disorder worry, whether or not they are
being evaluated.
Individuals with separation anxiety disorder worry excessively only
about separation from attachment figures, whereas individuals with generalized anxiety disorder
may worry about separation but present other excessive worry concerns as well.
Panic attacks that are triggered by worry in generalized anxiety disorder would
not qualify for panic disorder. However, if the individual experiences unexpected panic attacks
as well and shows persistent concern and worry or behavioral change because of the attacks, then
an additional diagnosis of panic disorder should be considered.
Individuals with generalized anxiety disorder
worry about multiple events, situations, or activities, only one of which may involve their health.
If the individual’s only fear is his or her own illness, then illness anxiety disorder should be
diagnosed. Worry focusing on somatic symptoms is characteristic for somatic symptom disorder.
Several features distinguish the excessive worry of generalized
anxiety disorder from the obsessional thoughts of obsessive-compulsive disorder. In generalized
anxiety disorder the focus of the worry is about forthcoming problems, and it is the
excessiveness of the worry about future events that is abnormal. In obsessive-compulsive
disorder, the obsessions are inappropriate ideas that take the form of intrusive and unwanted
thoughts, urges, or images.
Anxiety 
is 
invariably 
present 
in
posttraumatic stress disorder. Generalized anxiety disorder is not diagnosed if the anxiety and
worry are better explained by symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder. Although anxiety may
manifest in adjustment disorder, this residual category should be used only when the criteria are
not met for any other mental disorder (including generalized anxiety disorder). Moreover, in
