Depressive, bipolar, and psychotic disorders.
adjustment disorders, the anxiety occurs in response to an identifiable stressor within 3 months
of the onset of the stressor and does not persist for more than 6 months after the termination of
the stressor or its consequences.
Although generalized anxiety/worry is a common
associated feature of depressive, bipolar, and psychotic disorders, generalized anxiety disorder
may be diagnosed comorbidly if the anxiety/worry is sufficiently severe to warrant clinical
attention.
Comorbidity
Individuals whose presentation meets criteria for generalized anxiety disorder are likely to have
met, or currently meet, criteria for other anxiety and unipolar depressive disorders. The negative
affectivity (neuroticism) or emotional liability that underpins this pattern of comorbidity is
associated with temperamental antecedents and genetic and environmental risk factors shared
between these disorders, although independent pathways are also possible. Comorbidity with
substance use, conduct, psychotic, neurodevelopmental, and neurocognitive disorders is less
common.
255
Substance/Medication-Induced Anxiety Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Panic attacks or anxiety is predominant in the clinical picture.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
of both (1) and (2):
1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance
intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a
medication.
2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in
Criterion A.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by an anxiety disorder that is not
substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent anxiety
disorder could include the following:
The symptoms precede the onset of the substance/medication use; the
symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after
the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other
evidence 
suggesting 
the 
existence 
of 
an 
independent 
non-
substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder (e.g., a history of recurrent
non-substance/medication-related episodes).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
