cohesive whole. William E. Narrow, M.D., M.P.H., led the research group that developed the
overall research strategy for DSM-5, including the field trials, that greatly enhanced the evidence
base for this revision. In addition, we are grateful to those who contributed so much time to the
independent review of the revision proposals, including Kenneth S. Kendler, M.D., and Robert
Freedman, M.D., co-chairs of the Scientific Review Committee; John S. McIntyre, M.D., and
Joel Yager, M.D., co-chairs of the Clinical and Public Health Committee; and Glenn Martin,
M.D., chair of the APA Assembly
xxvi
review process. Special thanks go to Helena C. Kraemer, Ph.D., for her expert statistical
consultation; Michael B. First, M.D., for his valuable input on the coding and review of criteria;
and Paul S. Appelbaum, M.D., for feedback on forensic issues. Maria N. Ward, M.Ed., RHIT,
CCS-P, also helped in verifying all ICD coding. The Summit Group, which included these
consultants, the chairs of all review groups, the task force chairs, and the APA executive officers,
chaired by Dilip V. Jeste, M.D., provided leadership and vision in helping to achieve
compromise and consensus. This level of commitment has contributed to the balance and
objectivity that we feel are hallmarks of DSM-5.
We especially wish to recognize the outstanding APA Division of Research staff—identified
in the Task Force and Work Group listing at the front of this manual—who worked tirelessly to
interact with the task force, work groups, advisors, and reviewers to resolve issues, serve as
liaisons between the groups, direct and manage the academic and routine clinical practice field
trials, and record decisions in this important process. In particular, we appreciate the support and
guidance provided by James H. Scully Jr., M.D., Medical Director and CEO of the APA, through
the years and travails of the development process. Finally, we thank the editorial and production
staff of American Psychiatric Publishing—specifically, Rebecca Rinehart, Publisher; John
McDuffie, Editorial Director; Ann Eng, Senior Editor; Greg Kuny, Managing Editor; and
Tammy Cordova, Graphics Design Manager—for their guidance in bringing this all together and
creating the final product. It is the culmination of efforts of many talented individuals who
dedicated their time, expertise, and passion that made DSM-5 possible.
David J. Kupfer, M.D.
DSM-5 Task Force Chair
Darrel A. Regier, M.D., M.P.H.
DSM-5 Task Force Vice-Chair
December 19, 2012
