substance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
With onset during withdrawal: If criteria are met for withdrawal from the
substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
With onset after medication use: If symptoms developed at initiation of
medication, with a change in use of medication, or during withdrawal of
medication.
Recording Procedures
The name of the substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder begins with the specific
substance (e.g., cocaine, salbutamol) that is presumed to be causing the anxiety symptoms. The
diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set, which is based on the drug
class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance use disorder. For substances that do not
fit into any of the classes (e.g., salbutamol), the code for “other (or unknown) substance” should
be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific
class of substance is unknown, the same code should also be used.
To record the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is listed
first, followed by “with substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder” (incorporating the name
of the specific etiological substance/medication), followed by the specification of onset (i.e.,
onset during intoxication, onset during withdrawal, with onset after medication use). For
example, in the case of anxiety symptoms occurring during withdrawal in a man with a severe
lorazepam use disorder, the diagnosis is F13.280 severe lorazepam use disorder with lorazepam-
induced anxiety disorder, with onset during withdrawal. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid
severe lorazepam use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced anxiety disorder occurs
without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time
257
heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F16.980
psilocybin-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during intoxication). When more than one
substance is judged to play a significant role in the development of anxiety symptoms, each
should be listed separately (e.g., F15.280 severe methylphenidate use disorder with
methylphenidate-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during intoxication; F19.980 salbutamol-
induced anxiety disorder, with onset after medication use).
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder are prominent
symptoms of panic or anxiety (Criterion A) that are judged to be due to the effects of a substance
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or a toxin exposure). The panic or anxiety symptoms must
have developed during or soon after substance intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or
withdrawal from a medication, and the substances or medications must be capable of producing
the symptoms (Criterion B2). Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder due to a prescribed
treatment for a mental disorder or another medical condition must have its onset while the
individual is receiving the medication (or during withdrawal, if a withdrawal is associated with
