Substance intoxication and substance withdrawal.
the medication). Once the treatment is discontinued, the panic or anxiety symptoms will usually
improve or remit within days to several weeks to a month (depending on the half-life of the
substance/medication and the presence of withdrawal). The diagnosis of substance/medication-
induced anxiety disorder should not be given if the onset of the panic or anxiety symptoms
precedes the substance/medication intoxication or withdrawal, or if the symptoms persist for a
substantial period of time (i.e., usually longer than 1 month) from the time of severe intoxication
or withdrawal. If the panic or anxiety symptoms persist for substantial periods of time, other
causes for the symptoms should be considered.
The substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder diagnosis should be made instead of a
diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in
Criterion A are predominant in the clinical picture and are sufficiently severe to warrant
independent clinical attention.
Associated Features
Panic or anxiety can occur in association with intoxication with the following classes of
substances: alcohol, caffeine, cannabis, phencyclidine, other hallucinogens, inhalants, stimulants
(including cocaine), and other (or unknown) substances. Panic or anxiety can occur in
association with withdrawal from the following classes of substances: alcohol; opioids;
sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; stimulants (including cocaine); and other (or unknown)
substances. Some medications that evoke anxiety symptoms include anesthetics and analgesics,
sympathomimetics or other bronchodilators, anticholinergics, insulin, thyroid preparations, oral
contraceptives, antihistamines, antiparkinsonian medications, corticosteroids, antihypertensive
and cardiovascular medications, anticonvulsants, lithium carbonate, antipsychotic medications,
and antidepressant medications. Heavy metals and toxins (e.g., organophosphate insecticide,
nerve gases, carbon monoxide, CO2, volatile substances such as gasoline and paint) may also
cause panic or anxiety symptoms.
Prevalence
The prevalence of substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder is not clear. General
population data suggest that it may be rare, with a 12-month prevalence in the United States of
approximately 0.002%. However, in clinical populations, the prevalence is likely to be higher.
Diagnostic Markers
Laboratory assessments (e.g., urine toxicology) may be useful to measure substance intoxication
as part of an assessment for substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder.
258
Differential Diagnosis
Anxiety symptoms commonly occur in substance
intoxication and substance withdrawal. The diagnosis of the substance-specific intoxication or
substance-specific withdrawal will usually suffice to categorize the symptom presentation. A
diagnosis of substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder either with onset during intoxication
