Independent anxiety disorder (i.e., not induced by a substance/medication).
Delirium.
Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition.
F06.4
or with onset during withdrawal should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication
or substance withdrawal when the panic or anxiety symptoms are predominant in the clinical
picture and are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention. For example, panic or anxiety
symptoms are characteristic of alcohol withdrawal.
An 
independent 
anxiety
disorder 
co-occurring 
with 
substance/medication 
use 
is 
distinguished 
from 
a
substance/medication-induced 
anxiety 
disorder 
by 
the 
fact 
that 
even 
though 
a
substance/medication may be taken in high enough amounts to be possibly etiologically related
to the anxiety symptoms, the anxiety symptoms are observed at times other than during
substance/medication use (i.e., preceding the onset of substance/medication use or persisting for
a substantial period of time after substance intoxication, substance withdrawal, or medication
use) and would warrant the diagnosis of an independent anxiety disorder.
If panic or anxiety symptoms occur exclusively during the course of delirium, they are
considered to be an associated feature of the delirium and are not diagnosed separately.
If the panic or anxiety symptoms are attributed to
the physiological consequences of another medical condition (i.e., rather than to the medication
taken for the medical condition), anxiety disorder due to another medical condition should be
diagnosed. The history often provides the basis for such a judgment. At times, a change in the
treatment for the other medical condition (e.g., medication substitution or discontinuation) may
be needed to determine whether the medication is the causative agent (in which case the
symptoms may be better explained by substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder). If the
disturbance is attributable to both another medical condition and substance use, both diagnoses
(i.e., anxiety disorder due to another medical condition and substance/medication-induced
anxiety disorder) may be given. When there is insufficient evidence to determine whether the
panic or anxiety symptoms are attributable to a substance/medication or to another medical
condition or are primary (i.e., not attributable to either a substance or another medical condition),
a diagnosis of other specified or unspecified anxiety disorder would be indicated.
Anxiety Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Panic attacks or anxiety is predominant in the clinical picture.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another
medical condition.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder.
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition within the name of the
