mental disorder (e.g., F06.4 anxiety disorder due to pheochromocytoma). The other
259
medical condition should be coded and listed separately immediately before the
anxiety disorder due to the medical condition (e.g., D35.00 pheochromocytoma;
F06.4 anxiety disorder due to pheochromocytoma).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of anxiety disorder due to another medical condition is clinically significant
anxiety that is judged to be best explained as a physiological effect of another medical condition.
Symptoms can include prominent anxiety symptoms or panic attacks (Criterion A). The
judgment that the symptoms are best explained by the associated physical condition must be
based on evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings (Criterion B).
Additionally, it must be judged that the symptoms are not better accounted for by another mental
disorder (Criterion C)—in particular, adjustment disorder with anxiety, in which the stressor is
the medical condition. In this case, an individual with adjustment disorder is especially distressed
about the meaning or the consequences of the associated medical condition. By contrast, there is
often a prominent physical component to the anxiety (e.g., shortness of breath) when the anxiety
is due to another medical condition. The diagnosis is not made if the anxiety symptoms occur
only during the course of a delirium (Criterion D). The anxiety symptoms must cause clinically
significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning
(Criterion E).
In determining whether the anxiety symptoms are attributable to another medical condition,
the clinician must first establish the presence of the medical condition. Furthermore, it must be
established that anxiety symptoms can be etiologically related to the medical condition through a
physiological mechanism before making a judgment that this is the best explanation for the
symptoms in a specific individual. A careful and comprehensive assessment of multiple factors is
necessary to make this judgment. Several aspects of the clinical presentation should be
considered: 1) the presence of a clear temporal association between the onset, exacerbation, or
remission of the medical condition and the anxiety symptoms; 2) the presence of features that are
atypical of an independent anxiety disorder (e.g., atypical age at onset or course); and 3)
evidence in the literature that a known physiological mechanism (e.g., hyperthyroidism) causes
anxiety. In addition, the disturbance must not be better explained by an independent anxiety
disorder, a substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder, or another mental disorder (e.g.,
adjustment disorder).
A number of medical conditions are known to include anxiety as a symptomatic
manifestation. Examples include endocrine disease (e.g., hyperthyroidism, pheochromocytoma,
hypoglycemia, hyperadrenocortisolism), cardiovascular disorders (e.g., congestive heart failure,
pulmonary embolism, arrhythmia such as atrial fibrillation), respiratory illness (e.g., chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, pneumonia), metabolic disturbances (e.g., vitamin B12
deficiency, porphyria), and neurological illness (e.g., neoplasms, vestibular dysfunction,
encephalitis, seizure disorders).
