Delirium and major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
Mixed presentation of symptoms (e.g., mood and anxiety).
Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder.
Prevalence
The prevalence of anxiety disorder due to another medical condition is unclear. There appears to
be an elevated prevalence of anxiety disorders among individuals with a variety of medical
conditions, including asthma, hypertension, ulcers, and arthritis. However, this increased
prevalence may be due to reasons other than the anxiety disorder directly causing the medical
condition.
Development and Course
The development and course of anxiety disorder due to another medical condition generally
follows the course of the underlying illness. This diagnosis is not meant to include primary
anxiety disorders that arise in the context of chronic medical illness. This is
260
important to consider with older adults, who may experience chronic medical illness and then
develop independent anxiety disorders secondary to the chronic medical illness.
Diagnostic Markers
Laboratory assessments and/or medical examinations are necessary to confirm the diagnosis of
the associated medical condition.
Differential Diagnosis
A separate diagnosis of anxiety disorder due to
another medical condition is not given if the anxiety disturbance occurs exclusively during the
course of a delirium. However, a diagnosis of anxiety disorder due to another medical condition
may be given in addition to a diagnosis of major or mild neurocognitive disorder if the anxiety is
judged to be a physiological consequence of the pathological process causing the neurocognitive
disorder and if anxiety is a prominent part of the clinical presentation.
If the presentation includes a mix of
different types of symptoms, the specific mental disorder due to another medical condition
depends on which symptoms predominate in the clinical picture.
If there is evidence of recent or prolonged substance
use (including medications with psychoactive effects), withdrawal from a substance, or exposure
to a toxin, a substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder should be considered. Certain
medications are known to increase anxiety (e.g., corticosteroids, estrogens, metoclopramide), and
when this is the case, the medication may be the most likely etiology, although it may be difficult
to distinguish whether the anxiety is attributable to the medications or to the medical illness
itself. When a diagnosis of substance-induced anxiety is being made in relation to recreational or
nonprescribed drugs, it may be useful to obtain a urine or blood drug screen or other appropriate
laboratory evaluation. Symptoms that develop during or soon after substance intoxication or
withdrawal or after medication use may be especially indicative of a substance/medication-
induced anxiety disorder, depending on the type, duration, or amount of the substance used. If
the disturbance is associated with both another medical condition and substance use, both
