Anxiety disorder (not due to a known medical condition).
Illness anxiety disorder.
Adjustment disorders.
diagnoses (i.e., anxiety disorder due to another medical condition and substance/medication-
induced anxiety disorder) can be given. Features such as onset after age 45 years or the presence
of atypical symptoms during a panic attack (e.g., vertigo, loss of consciousness, loss of bladder
or bowel control, slurred speech, amnesia) suggest the possibility that another medical condition
or a substance may be causing the panic attack symptoms.
Anxiety disorder due to another medical
condition should be distinguished from other anxiety disorders (especially panic disorder and
generalized anxiety disorder). In other anxiety disorders, no specific and direct causative
physiological mechanisms associated with another medical condition can be demonstrated. Late
age at onset, atypical symptoms, and the absence of a personal or family history of anxiety
disorders suggest the need for a thorough assessment to rule out the diagnosis of anxiety disorder
due to another medical condition. Anxiety disorders can exacerbate or pose increased risk for
medical conditions such as cardiovascular events and myocardial infarction and should not be
diagnosed as anxiety disorder due to another medical condition in these cases.
Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition should be
distinguished from illness anxiety disorder. Illness anxiety disorder is characterized by worry
about illness, concern about pain, and bodily preoccupations. In the case of illness anxiety
disorder, individuals may or may not have diagnosed medical conditions. Although
261
an individual with illness anxiety disorder and a diagnosed medical condition is likely to
experience anxiety about the medical condition, the medical condition is not physiologically
related to the anxiety symptoms.
Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition should be distinguished
from adjustment disorders with anxiety or adjustment disorders with anxiety and depressed
mood. Adjustment disorder is warranted when individuals experience a maladaptive response to
the stress of being diagnosed with or having to manage the medical condition. The reaction to
stress usually concerns the meaning or consequences of the medical condition, in contrast with
the experience of anxiety or mood symptoms that occur as a physiological consequence of the
medical condition. In adjustment disorder, the anxiety symptoms are typically related to coping
with the stress of having the medical condition, whereas in anxiety disorder due to another
medical condition, individuals are more likely to have prominent physical symptoms and to be
focused on issues other than the stress of the illness itself.
Other Specified Anxiety Disorder
F41.8
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of an
anxiety disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet
the full criteria for any of the disorders in the anxiety disorders diagnostic class, and
