Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders include obsessive-
compulsive disorder (OCD), body dysmorphic disorder, hoarding disorder, trichotillomania
(hair-pulling disorder), excoriation (skin-picking) disorder, substance/medication-induced
obsessive-compulsive and related disorder, obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to
another medical condition, other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder (e.g., nail
biting, lip biting, cheek chewing, obsessional jealousy, olfactory reference disorder [olfactory
reference syndrome]), and unspecified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder.
OCD is characterized by the presence of obsessions and/or compulsions. Obsessions are
recurrent and persistent thoughts, urges, or images that are experienced as intrusive and
unwanted, whereas compulsions are repetitive behaviors or mental acts that an individual feels
driven to perform in response to an obsession or according to rules that must be applied rigidly.
Some other obsessive-compulsive and related disorders are also characterized by preoccupations
and by repetitive behaviors or mental acts in response to the preoccupations. Other obsessive-
compulsive and related disorders are characterized primarily by recurrent body-focused
repetitive behaviors (e.g., hair pulling, skin picking) and repeated attempts to decrease or stop the
behaviors.
The inclusion of a chapter on obsessive-compulsive and related disorders in DSM-5 reflects
the increasing evidence of these disorders’ relatedness to one another in terms of a range of
diagnostic validators as well as the clinical utility of grouping these disorders in the same
chapter. Clinicians are encouraged to screen for these conditions in individuals who present with
one of them and be aware of overlaps among these conditions. At the same time, there are
important differences in diagnostic validators and treatment approaches across these disorders.
Moreover, there are close relationships between the anxiety disorders and some of the obsessive-
compulsive and related disorders (e.g., OCD), which is reflected in the sequence of DSM-5
chapters, with obsessive-compulsive and related disorders following anxiety disorders.
The obsessive-compulsive and related disorders differ from developmentally normative
preoccupations and rituals by being excessive or persisting beyond developmentally appropriate
periods. The distinction between the presence of subclinical symptoms and a clinical disorder
requires assessment of a number of factors, including the individual’s level of distress and
impairment in functioning.
The chapter begins with OCD. It then covers body dysmorphic disorder and hoarding
disorder, which are characterized by cognitive symptoms such as perceived defects or flaws in
physical appearance or the perceived need to save possessions, respectively. The chapter then
covers trichotillomania and excoriation disorder, which are characterized by recurrent body-
focused repetitive behaviors. Finally, it covers substance/medication-induced obsessive-
compulsive and related disorder, obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another
medical condition, other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder, and unspecified
