obsessive-compulsive and related disorder.
264
While the specific content of obsessions and compulsions varies among individuals, certain
symptom dimensions are common in OCD, including those of cleaning (contamination
obsessions and cleaning compulsions); symmetry (symmetry obsessions and repeating, ordering,
and counting compulsions); forbidden or taboo thoughts (e.g., aggressive, sexual, and religious
obsessions and related compulsions); and harm (e.g., fears of harm to self or others and related
checking compulsions). The tic-related specifier of OCD is used when an individual has a
current or past history of a tic disorder.
Body dysmorphic disorder is characterized by preoccupation with one or more perceived
defects or flaws in physical appearance that are not observable or appear only slight to others,
and by repetitive behaviors (e.g., mirror checking, excessive grooming, skin picking, or
reassurance seeking) or mental acts (e.g., comparing one’s appearance with that of other people)
in response to the appearance concerns. The appearance preoccupations are not better explained
by concerns with body fat or weight in an individual with an eating disorder. Muscle dysmorphia
is a form of body dysmorphic disorder that is characterized by the belief that one’s body build is
too small or is insufficiently muscular.
Hoarding disorder is characterized by persistent difficulty discarding or parting with
possessions, regardless of their actual value, as a result of a strong perceived need to save the
items and distress associated with discarding them. Hoarding disorder differs from normal
collecting. For example, symptoms of hoarding disorder result in the accumulation of a large
number of possessions that congest and clutter active living areas to the extent that their intended
use is substantially compromised. The excessive acquisition form of hoarding disorder, which
characterizes most but not all individuals with hoarding disorder, consists of excessive
collecting, buying, or stealing of items that are not needed or for which there is no available
space.
Trichotillomania is characterized by recurrent pulling out of one's hair resulting in hair loss,
and repeated attempts to decrease or stop hair pulling. Excoriation disorder is characterized by
recurrent picking of one’s skin resulting in skin lesions and repeated attempts to decrease or stop
skin picking. The body-focused repetitive behaviors that characterize these two disorders are not
triggered by obsessions or preoccupations; however, they may be preceded or accompanied by
various emotional states, such as feelings of anxiety or boredom. They may also be preceded by
an increasing sense of tension or may lead to gratification, pleasure, or a sense of relief when the
hair is pulled out or the skin is picked. Individuals with these disorders may have varying
degrees of conscious awareness of the behavior while engaging in it, with some individuals
displaying more focused attention on the behavior (with preceding tension and subsequent relief)
and other individuals displaying more automatic behavior (with the behaviors seeming to occur
without full awareness).
Substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder consists of
symptoms characteristic of the obsessive-compulsive and related disorders developed in the
context of substance intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a
medication. Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another medical condition
involves symptoms characteristic of obsessive-compulsive and related disorders that are the
