F42.2
direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition.
Other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder (e.g., nail biting, lip biting, cheek
chewing, obsessional jealousy, olfactory reference disorder [olfactory reference syndrome]) and
unspecified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder consist of symptoms that cause clinically
significant distress or impairment that do not meet criteria for a specific obsessive-compulsive
and related disorder in DSM-5 because of atypical presentation or uncertain etiology. These
categories are also used for other specific syndromes that are not listed in Section II and when
insufficient information is available to diagnose the presentation as another obsessive-
compulsive and related disorder.
Those obsessive-compulsive and related disorders that have a cognitive component (i.e.,
OCD, body dysmorphic disorder, and hoarding disorder) include a specifier for
265
indicating the individual’s degree of insight with respect to disorder-related beliefs, which
ranges from “good or fair insight” to “poor insight” to “absent insight/delusional beliefs.” Those
individuals whose degree of insight is in the “absent insight/delusional beliefs” range should not
be given an additional diagnosis of a psychotic disorder unless their delusional beliefs involve
content that extends beyond what is characteristic of their obsessive-compulsive and related
disorder (e.g., an individual with body dysmorphic disorder who is convinced that his or her food
has been poisoned).
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Presence of obsessions, compulsions, or both:
Obsessions are defined by (1) and (2):
1. Recurrent and persistent thoughts, urges, or images that are experienced, at
some time during the disturbance, as intrusive and unwanted, and that in
most individuals cause marked anxiety or distress.
2. The individual attempts to ignore or suppress such thoughts, urges, or
images, or to neutralize them with some other thought or action (i.e., by
performing a compulsion).
Compulsions are defined by (1) and (2):
1. Repetitive behaviors (e.g., hand washing, ordering, checking) or mental acts
(e.g., praying, counting, repeating words silently) that the individual feels
driven to perform in response to an obsession or according to rules that must
be applied rigidly.
2. The behaviors or mental acts are aimed at preventing or reducing anxiety or
distress, or preventing some dreaded event or situation; however, these
