behaviors or mental acts are not connected in a realistic way with what they
are designed to neutralize or prevent, or are clearly excessive.
Note: Young children may not be able to articulate the aims of these
behaviors or mental acts.
B. The obsessions or compulsions are time-consuming (e.g., take more than 1 hour
per day) or cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The obsessive-compulsive symptoms are not attributable to the physiological
effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical
condition.
D. The disturbance is not better explained by the symptoms of another mental
disorder (e.g., excessive worries, as in generalized anxiety disorder;
preoccupation with appearance, as in body dysmorphic disorder; difficulty
discarding or parting with possessions, as in hoarding disorder; hair pulling, as in
trichotillomania [hair-pulling disorder]; skin picking, as in excoriation [skin-
picking] disorder; stereotypies, as in stereotypic movement disorder; ritualized
eating behavior, as in eating disorders; preoccupation with substances or
gambling, as in substance-related and addictive disorders; preoccupation with
having an illness, as in illness anxiety disorder; sexual urges or fantasies, as in
paraphilic disorders; impulses, as in disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct
disorders; guilty ruminations, as in major depressive disorder; thought insertion
or delusional preoccupations, as in schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
disorders; or repetitive patterns of behavior, as in autism spectrum disorder).
266
Specify if:
With good or fair insight: The individual recognizes that obsessive-compulsive
disorder beliefs are definitely or probably not true or that they may or may not be
true.
With poor insight: The individual thinks obsessive-compulsive disorder beliefs
are probably true.
With absent insight/delusional beliefs: The individual is completely convinced
that obsessive-compulsive disorder beliefs are true.
Specify if:
Tic-related: The individual has a current or past history of a tic disorder.
Specifiers
Individuals with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) vary in the degree of insight they have
about the accuracy of the beliefs that underlie their obsessive-compulsive symptoms. Many
individuals have good or fair insight (e.g., the individual believes that the house definitely will
not, probably will not, or may or may not burn down if the stove is not checked 30 times). Some
