have poor insight (e.g., the individual believes that the house will probably burn down if the
stove is not checked 30 times), and a few (4% or less) have absent insight/delusional beliefs
(e.g., the individual is convinced that the house will burn down if the stove is not checked 30
times). Insight can vary within an individual over the course of the illness. Poorer insight has
been linked to worse long-term outcome.
Up to 30% of individuals with OCD have a lifetime tic disorder. This is most common in
men with onset of OCD in childhood. These individuals tend to differ from those without a
history of tic disorders in the themes of their OCD symptoms, comorbidity, course, and pattern
of familial transmission.
Diagnostic Features
The characteristic symptoms of OCD are the presence of obsessions and compulsions (Criterion
A). Obsessions are repetitive and persistent thoughts (e.g., of contamination), images (e.g., of
violent or horrific scenes), or urges (e.g., to stab someone). Importantly, obsessions are not
pleasurable or experienced as voluntary: they are intrusive and unwanted and cause marked
distress or anxiety in most individuals. The individual attempts to ignore or suppress these
obsessions (e.g., avoiding triggers or using thought suppression) or to neutralize them with
another thought or action (e.g., performing a compulsion). Compulsions (or rituals) are repetitive
behaviors (e.g., washing, checking) or mental acts (e.g., counting, repeating words silently) that
the individual feels driven to perform in response to an obsession or according to rules that must
be applied rigidly. Most individuals with OCD have both obsessions and compulsions.
Obsessions and compulsions are typically thematically related (e.g., thoughts of contamination
associated with washing rituals; thoughts of harm associated with repeated checking).
Individuals often report that they perform compulsions to reduce the distress triggered by
obsessions or to prevent a feared event (e.g., becoming ill). However, these compulsions either
are not connected in a realistic way to the feared event (e.g., arranging items symmetrically to
prevent harm to a loved one) or are clearly excessive (e.g., showering for hours each day).
Compulsions are not done for pleasure, although individuals may experience temporary relief
from anxiety or distress.
The specific content of obsessions and compulsions varies between individuals. However,
certain themes, or dimensions, are common, including those of cleaning (contamination
obsessions and cleaning compulsions); symmetry (symmetry obsessions and repeating, ordering,
and counting compulsions); forbidden or taboo thoughts (e.g., aggressive, sexual, or religious
obsessions and related compulsions); and harm (e.g., fears of harm to self or others and checking
compulsions). Some individuals also have difficulties discarding and accumulate objects as a
consequence of typical obsessions and
267
compulsions (e.g., fears of harming others); such compulsions must be distinguished from
the primary accumulation behaviors seen in hoarding disorder, discussed later in this chapter.
These themes occur across different cultures, are relatively consistent over time in adults with the
disorder, and may be associated with different neural substrates. Importantly, individuals often
have symptoms in more than one dimension.
