Criterion B emphasizes that obsessions and compulsions must be time-consuming (e.g., more
than 1 hour per day) or cause clinically significant distress or impairment to warrant a diagnosis
of OCD. This criterion helps to distinguish the disorder from the occasional intrusive thoughts or
repetitive behaviors that are common in the general population (e.g., double-checking that a door
is locked). The frequency and severity of obsessions and compulsions vary across individuals
with OCD (e.g., some have mild to moderate symptoms, spending 1–3 hours per day obsessing
or doing compulsions, whereas others have nearly constant intrusive thoughts or compulsions
that can be incapacitating).
Associated Features
Sensory phenomena, defined as physical experiences (e.g., physical sensations, just-right
sensations, and feelings of incompleteness) that precede compulsions, are common in OCD. Up
to 60% of individuals with OCD report these phenomena.
Individuals with OCD experience a range of affective responses when confronted with
situations that trigger obsessions and compulsions. For example, many individuals experience
marked anxiety that can include recurrent panic attacks. Others report strong feelings of disgust.
While performing compulsions, some individuals report a distressing sense of “incompleteness”
or uneasiness until things look, feel, or sound “just right.”
It is common for individuals with the disorder to avoid people, places, and things that trigger
obsessions and compulsions. For example, individuals with contamination concerns might avoid
public situations (e.g., restaurants, public restrooms) to reduce exposure to feared contaminants;
individuals with intrusive thoughts about causing harm might avoid social interactions.
Many individuals with OCD have dysfunctional beliefs. These beliefs can include an inflated
sense of responsibility and the tendency to overestimate threat; perfectionism and intolerance of
uncertainty; and overimportance of thoughts (e.g., believing that having a forbidden thought is as
bad as acting on it) and the need to control thoughts. These beliefs, however, are not specific to
OCD. The involvement of family or friends in compulsive rituals, termed accommodation, can
exacerbate or maintain symptoms and is an important target in treatment, especially in children.
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence of OCD in the United States is 1.2%, with a similar prevalence
internationally (including Canada, Puerto Rico, Germany, Taiwan, Korea, and New Zealand;
1.1%–1.8%). Women are affected at a slightly higher rate than men in adulthood, although men
are more commonly affected in childhood.
Development and Course
In the United States, the mean age at onset of OCD is 19.5 years, and 25% of cases start by age
14 years. Onset after age 35 years is unusual but does occur. Men have an earlier age at onset
than women: nearly 25% of men have onset before age 10 years. The onset of symptoms is
typically gradual; however, acute onset can also occur.
If OCD is untreated, the course is usually chronic, often with waxing and waning symptoms.
Some individuals have an episodic course, and a minority have a deteriorating course. Without
treatment, remission rates in adults are low (e.g., 20% for those reevaluated 40 years later). Onset
