Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
in childhood or adolescence can lead to a lifetime of OCD.
268
However, 40% of individuals with onset of OCD in childhood or adolescence may
experience remission by early adulthood. The course of OCD is often complicated by the co-
occurrence of other disorders (see section “Comorbidity” for this disorder).
Compulsions are more easily diagnosed in children than obsessions are because compulsions
are usually observable. However, most children have both obsessions and compulsions (as do
most adults). The pattern of symptoms in adults can be stable over time, but it is more variable in
children. Some differences in the content of obsessions and compulsions have been reported
when children and adolescent samples are compared with adult samples. These differences likely
reflect content appropriate to different developmental stages (e.g., higher rates of sexual and
religious obsessions in adolescents than in children; higher rates of harm obsessions [e.g., fears
of catastrophic events, such as death or illness to self or loved ones] in children and adolescents
than in adults).
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Greater internalizing symptoms, higher negative emotionality, and behavioral
inhibition in childhood are possible temperamental risk factors.
Different environmental factors may increase the risk for OCD. These include
adverse perinatal events, premature birth, maternal tobacco use during pregnancy, physical and
sexual abuse in childhood, and other stressful or traumatic events. Some children may develop
the sudden onset of obsessive-compulsive symptoms, which has been associated with different
environmental factors, including various infectious agents and a postinfectious autoimmune
syndrome.
The rate of OCD among first-degree relatives of adults with OCD is
approximately two times that among first-degree relatives of those without the disorder;
however, among first-degree relatives of individuals with onset of OCD in childhood or
adolescence, the rate is increased 10-fold. Familial transmission is due in part to genetic factors
(e.g., a concordance rate of 0.57 for monozygotic vs. 0.22 for dizygotic twins). Twin studies
suggest that additive genetic effects account for ~40% of the variance in obsessive-compulsive
symptoms. Dysfunction in the orbitofrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and striatum have
been most strongly implicated; alterations in frontolimbic, frontoparietal, and cerebellar
networks have also been reported.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
OCD occurs across the world. There is substantial similarity across cultures in the gender
distribution, age at onset, and comorbidity of OCD. Moreover, around the globe, there is a
similar symptom structure involving cleaning, symmetry, hoarding, taboo thoughts, and fear of
harm. However, regional variation in symptom expression exists, and cultural factors may shape
the content of obsessions and compulsions. For example, obsessions related to sexual content
may be reported less frequently in some religious and cultural groups, and obsessions related to
violence and aggression may be more common in settings with higher prevalence of urban
