violence. Attributions of OCD symptoms vary cross-culturally, including physical, social,
spiritual, and supernatural causes; specific compulsions and help-seeking options may be
reinforced by these cultural attributions.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Men have an earlier age at onset of OCD than women, often in childhood, and are more likely to
have comorbid tic disorders. Onset in girls is more typically in adolescence; among adults, OCD
is slightly more common in women than in men. Gender differences in the pattern of symptom
dimensions have been reported, with, for example, women more likely to have symptoms in the
cleaning dimension and men more likely to have
269
symptoms in the forbidden thoughts and symmetry dimensions. Onset or exacerbation of OCD,
as well as symptoms that can interfere with the mother-infant relationship (e.g., aggressive
obsessions such as intrusive violent thoughts of harming the infant, leading to avoidance of the
infant), has been reported in the peripartum period. Some women also report exacerbation of
OCD symptoms premenstrually.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
A systematic literature review of suicidal ideation and suicide attempts in clinical samples with
OCD from multiple countries found a mean rate of lifetime suicide attempts of 14.2%, a mean
rate of lifetime suicidal ideation of 44.1%, and a mean rate of current suicidal ideation of 25.9%.
Predictors of greater suicide risk were severity of OCD, the symptom dimension of unacceptable
thoughts, severity of comorbid depressive and anxiety symptoms, and past history of suicidality.
Another international systematic review of 48 studies found a moderate to high significant
association between suicidal ideation/suicide attempts and OCD.
A cross-sectional study of 582 outpatients with OCD from Brazil found that 36% reported
lifetime suicidal thoughts, 20% had made suicide plans, 11% had already attempted suicide, and
10% presented with current suicidal thoughts. The sexual/religious dimension of OCD and
comorbid substance use disorders were associated with suicidal thoughts and suicide plans,
impulse-control disorders were associated with current suicidal thoughts and with suicide plans
and attempts, and lifetime comorbid major depressive disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) were associated with all aspects of suicidal behaviors.
In a study using Swedish national registry data involving 36,788 individuals with OCD and
matched general population control subjects, individuals with OCD had a higher risk of suicide
death (OR = 9.8) and suicide attempt (OR = 5.5), and the increased risk for both outcomes
remained substantial even after adjusting for psychiatric comorbidities. Comorbid personality or
substance use disorder increased suicide risk, whereas female gender, higher parental education,
and a comorbid anxiety disorder were protective factors.
Functional Consequences of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
OCD is associated with reduced quality of life as well as high levels of social and occupational
impairment. Impairment occurs across many different domains of life and is associated with
