Anxiety disorders.
Major depressive disorder.
Other obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
symptom severity. Impairment can be caused by the time spent obsessing and performing
compulsions. Avoidance of situations that can trigger obsessions or compulsions can also
severely impair functioning. In addition, specific symptoms can create specific obstacles. For
example, obsessions about harm can make relationships with family and friends feel hazardous;
the result can be avoidance of these relationships. Obsessions about symmetry can derail the
timely completion of school or work projects because the project never feels “just right,”
potentially resulting in school failure or job loss. Health consequences can also occur. For
example, individuals with contamination concerns may avoid doctors’ offices and hospitals (e.g.,
because of fears of exposure to germs) or develop dermatological problems (e.g., skin lesions
due to excessive washing). Sometimes the symptoms of the disorder interfere with its own
treatment (e.g., when medications are considered contaminated). When the disorder starts in
childhood or adolescence, individuals may experience developmental difficulties. For example,
adolescents may avoid socializing with peers; young adults may struggle when they leave home
to live independently. The result can be few significant relationships outside the family and a
lack of autonomy and financial independence from their family of origin. In addition, some
individuals with OCD try to impose rules and prohibitions on family members because of their
obsessions
270
(e.g., no one in the family can have visitors to the house for fear of contamination), and this can
lead to family dysfunction.
Differential Diagnosis
Recurrent thoughts, avoidant behaviors, and repetitive requests for reassurance
can also occur in anxiety disorders. However, the recurrent thoughts that are present in
generalized anxiety disorder (i.e., worries) are usually about real-life concerns, whereas the
obsessions of OCD usually do not involve real-life concerns and can include content that is odd,
irrational, or of a seemingly magical nature; moreover, compulsions are usually present and
usually linked to the obsessions. Like individuals with OCD, individuals with specific phobia
can have a fear reaction to specific objects or situations; however, in specific phobia the feared
object is usually much more circumscribed, and rituals are not present. In social anxiety disorder,
the feared objects or situations are limited to social interactions or performance situations, and
avoidance or reassurance seeking is focused on reducing feelings of embarrassment.
OCD needs to be distinguished from the rumination of major
depressive disorder, in which thoughts are usually mood-congruent and not necessarily
experienced as intrusive or distressing; moreover, ruminations are not linked to compulsions, as
is typical in OCD.
In body dysmorphic disorder, the obsessions and
compulsions are limited to concerns about physical appearance; and in trichotillomania (hair-
pulling disorder), the compulsive behavior is limited to hair pulling in the absence of obsessions.
Hoarding disorder symptoms focus exclusively on the persistent difficulty discarding or parting
with possessions, marked distress associated with discarding items, and excessive accumulation
of objects. However, if an individual has obsessions that are typical of OCD (e.g., concerns about
