Eating disorders.
Tics (in tic disorder) and stereotyped movements.
Psychotic disorders.
Other compulsive-like behaviors.
Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder.
incompleteness or harm), and these obsessions lead to compulsive accumulation (e.g., acquiring
all objects in a set to attain a sense of completeness or not discarding old newspapers because
they may contain information that could prevent harm), a diagnosis of OCD should be given
instead.
OCD can be distinguished from anorexia nervosa in that in OCD the obsessions
and compulsions are not limited to concerns about weight and food.
A tic is a sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic
motor movement or vocalization (e.g., eye blinking, throat clearing). A stereotyped movement is
a repetitive, seemingly driven, nonfunctional motor behavior (e.g., head banging, body rocking,
self-biting). Tics and stereotyped movements are typically less complex than compulsions and
are not aimed at neutralizing obsessions. However, distinguishing between complex tics and
compulsions can be difficult. Whereas compulsions are usually preceded by obsessions, tics are
often preceded by premonitory sensory urges. Some individuals have symptoms of both OCD
and a tic disorder, in which case both diagnoses may be warranted.
Some individuals with OCD have poor insight or even delusional OCD
beliefs. However, they have obsessions and compulsions (distinguishing their condition from
delusional disorder) and do not have other features of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder
(e.g., hallucinations or disorganized speech). For individuals whose OCD symptoms warrant the
“with absent insight/delusional beliefs” specifier, these symptoms should not be diagnosed as a
psychotic disorder.
Certain behaviors are sometimes described as “compulsive,”
including sexual behavior (in the case of paraphilias), gambling (i.e., gambling disorder), and
substance use (e.g., alcohol use disorder). However, these behaviors differ
271
from the compulsions of OCD in that the person usually derives pleasure from the activity and
may wish to resist it only because of its deleterious consequences.
Although obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
and OCD have similar names, the clinical manifestations of these disorders are quite different.
Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder is not characterized by intrusive thoughts, images, or
urges or by repetitive behaviors that are performed in response to these intrusive symptoms;
instead, it involves an enduring and pervasive maladaptive pattern of excessive perfectionism
and rigid control. If an individual manifests symptoms of both OCD and obsessive-compulsive
personality disorder, both diagnoses can be given.
Comorbidity
Individuals with OCD often have other psychopathology. Many adults with the disorder in the
United States have a lifetime diagnosis of an anxiety disorder (76%; e.g., panic disorder, social
anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, specific phobia) or a depressive or bipolar
disorder (63% for any depressive or bipolar disorder, with the most common being major
depressive disorder [41%]); a lifetime diagnosis of an impulse-control disorder (56%) or a
substance use disorder (39%) is also common. Onset of OCD is usually later than for most
