F45.22
comorbid anxiety disorders (with the exception of separation anxiety disorder) and PTSD but
often precedes that of depressive disorders. In a study of 214 treatment-seeking adults in the
United States with DSM-IV OCD at intake, comorbid obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
was found in 23%–32% of individuals followed longitudinally.
Up to 30% of individuals with OCD also have a lifetime tic disorder. A comorbid tic disorder
is most common in men with onset of OCD in childhood. These individuals tend to differ from
those without a history of tic disorders in the themes of their OCD symptoms, comorbidity,
course, and pattern of familial transmission. A triad of OCD, tic disorder, and attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder can also be seen in children.
Several obsessive-compulsive and related disorders, including body dysmorphic disorder,
trichotillomania, and excoriation (skin-picking) disorder, also occur more frequently in
individuals with OCD than in those without OCD.
OCD is also much more common in individuals with certain other disorders than would be
expected based on its prevalence in the general population; when one of those other disorders is
diagnosed, the individual should be assessed for OCD as well. For example, in individuals with
schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder, the prevalence of OCD is approximately 12%. Rates
of OCD are also elevated in bipolar disorder; eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa and
bulimia nervosa; body dysmorphic disorder; and Tourette’s disorder.
Body Dysmorphic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Preoccupation with one or more perceived defects or flaws in physical
appearance that are not observable or appear slight to others.
B. At some point during the course of the disorder, the individual has performed
repetitive behaviors (e.g., mirror checking, excessive grooming, skin picking,
reassurance seeking) or mental acts (e.g., comparing his or her appearance with
that of others) in response to the appearance concerns.
C. The preoccupation causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
272
D. The appearance preoccupation is not better explained by concerns with body fat
or weight in an individual whose symptoms meet diagnostic criteria for an eating
disorder.
Specify if:
With muscle dysmorphia: The individual is preoccupied with the idea that his
or her body build is too small or insufficiently muscular. This specifier is used
even if the individual is preoccupied with other body areas, which is often the
case.
