Specify if:
Indicate degree of insight regarding body dysmorphic disorder beliefs (e.g., “I look
ugly” or “I look deformed”).
With good or fair insight: The individual recognizes that the body dysmorphic
disorder beliefs are definitely or probably not true or that they may or may not be
true.
With poor insight: The individual thinks that the body dysmorphic disorder
beliefs are probably true.
With absent insight/delusional beliefs: The individual is completely convinced
that the body dysmorphic disorder beliefs are true.
Specifiers
Muscle dysmorphia, a form of body dysmorphic disorder occurring almost exclusively in men
and adolescent boys, consists of preoccupation with the idea that one’s body is too small or
insufficiently lean or muscular. Individuals with this form of the disorder actually have a normal-
looking body or are even very muscular. They may also be preoccupied with other body areas,
such as skin or hair. A majority (but not all) diet, exercise, and/or lift weights excessively,
sometimes causing bodily damage. Some use potentially dangerous anabolic-androgenic steroids
and other substances to try to make their body bigger and more muscular.
Individuals with body dysmorphic disorder vary in the degree of insight they have about the
accuracy of their body dysmorphic disorder beliefs (e.g., “I look ugly,” “I look deformed”).
Insight regarding body dysmorphic disorder beliefs can range from good to absent/delusional
(i.e., delusional beliefs consisting of complete conviction that the individual’s view of his or her
appearance is accurate and undistorted). On average, insight is poor, and one-third or more of
individuals currently have absent insight/delusional body dysmorphic disorder beliefs.
Individuals with delusional body dysmorphic disorder tend to have greater morbidity in some
areas (e.g., suicidal thoughts or behavior), but this appears to be accounted for by their tendency
to have more severe body dysmorphic disorder symptoms.
Diagnostic Features
Individuals with body dysmorphic disorder (formerly known as dysmorphophobia) are
preoccupied with one or more perceived defects or flaws in their physical appearance, which
they believe look ugly, unattractive, abnormal, or deformed (Criterion A). The perceived flaws
are not observable or appear only slight to other individuals. Concerns range from looking
“unattractive” or “not right” to looking “hideous” or “like a monster.” Preoccupations can focus
on one or many body areas, most commonly the skin (e.g., perceived acne, scars, lines, wrinkles,
paleness), hair (e.g., “thinning” hair or “excessive” body or facial hair), or nose (e.g., size or
shape). However, any body area can be the focus of concern (e.g., eyes, teeth, weight, stomach,
breasts, legs, face size or shape, lips, chin, eyebrows, genitals). Some individuals are concerned
about perceived asymmetry of body areas. The preoccupations are intrusive, unwanted, time-
consuming (occurring, on average, 3–8 hours per day), and usually difficult to resist or control.
Excessive repetitive behaviors or mental acts (e.g., comparing) are performed in response to
