the preoccupation (Criterion B). The individual feels driven to perform these
273
behaviors, which are not pleasurable and may increase anxiety and dysphoria. They are
typically time-consuming and difficult to resist or control. Common behaviors are comparing
one’s appearance with that of other individuals; repeatedly checking perceived defects in mirrors
or other reflecting surfaces or examining them directly; taking excessive “selfies”; excessively
grooming (e.g., combing, styling, shaving, plucking or pulling hair); seeking reassurance about
how the perceived flaws look; touching disliked areas to check them; excessively exercising or
weight lifting; and seeking cosmetic procedures. Some individuals excessively tan (e.g., to
darken “pale” skin or diminish perceived acne), repeatedly change their clothes (e.g., to
camouflage perceived defects), or compulsively shop (e.g., for beauty products). Compulsive
skin picking intended to improve perceived skin defects is common and can cause skin damage,
infections, or ruptured blood vessels. Camouflaging (i.e., hiding or covering) perceived defects, a
very common behavior in individuals with body dysmorphic disorder, may involve repetitive
behaviors (e.g., repeatedly applying makeup, adjusting a hat or clothing, rearranging head hair to
cover the forehead or eyes). The preoccupation must cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C); usually
both are present. Body dysmorphic disorder must be differentiated from an eating disorder. Body
dysmorphic disorder by proxy is a form of body dysmorphic disorder in which individuals are
preoccupied with defects they perceive in another person’s appearance, most often a significant
other (e.g., spouse or partner), but sometimes a parent, child, sibling, or stranger.
Associated Features
Many individuals with body dysmorphic disorder have ideas or delusions of reference, believing
that other people take special notice of them or mock them because of how they look. Body
dysmorphic disorder is associated with high levels of anxiety, social anxiety, social avoidance,
depressed mood, negative affectivity (neuroticism), rejection sensitivity, and perfectionism as
well as low extroversion and low self-esteem. Body dysmorphic disorder is also associated with
elevated hostility and aggressive behavior. Many individuals are ashamed of their appearance
and their excessive focus on how they look and are reluctant to reveal their concerns to others. A
majority of individuals receive cosmetic treatment to try to improve their perceived defects.
Dermatological treatment and surgery are most common, but any type (e.g., dental, electrolysis)
may be received. Some individuals perform surgery on themselves. Body dysmorphic disorder
appears to respond poorly to such treatments and sometimes becomes worse. Some individuals
take legal action or are violent toward the clinician (e.g., surgeon) because they are dissatisfied
with the cosmetic outcome.
Body dysmorphic disorder has been associated with abnormalities in emotion recognition,
attention, and executive function, as well as information-processing biases and inaccuracies in
interpretation of information and social situations. For example, individuals with this disorder
tend to have a bias for negative and threatening interpretations of facial expressions and
ambiguous scenarios. Body dysmorphic disorder is also characterized by visual processing
abnormalities, with a bias for analyzing and encoding details rather than holistic or configural
