Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
aspects of visual stimuli.
Prevalence
The point prevalence in a nationwide epidemiological study among U.S. adults was 2.4% (2.5%
in women and 2.2% in men). Outside the United States (e.g., Germany), similar studies indicate
that the point prevalence is 1.7%–2.9%, with a gender distribution similar to that in the United
States. Globally, the point prevalence is 11%–13% among dermatology patients, 13%–15%
among general cosmetic surgery patients, 20% in rhinoplasty surgery patients, 11% among adult
jaw correction surgery patients, and 5%–10% among adult orthodontia/cosmetic dentistry
patients. Among adolescents and college students, point prevalence rates are relatively higher in
girls/young women compared with boys/young men.
274
Development and Course
The mean age at disorder onset is 16–17 years, the median age at onset is 15 years, and the most
common age at onset is 12–13 years; in two-thirds of individuals, onset is before age 18.
Subclinical body dysmorphic disorder symptoms begin, on average, at age 12 or 13 years.
Subclinical concerns usually evolve gradually to the full disorder, although some individuals
experience abrupt onset of body dysmorphic disorder. The disorder appears to usually be
chronic, although improvement is likely when evidence-based treatment is received. The
disorder’s clinical features appear largely similar in children/adolescents and adults. Body
dysmorphic disorder occurs in the elderly, but little is known about the disorder in this age
group. Individuals with disorder onset before age 18 years have more comorbidity and are more
likely to have gradual (rather than acute) disorder onset than those with adult-onset body
dysmorphic disorder.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Body dysmorphic disorder has been associated with high rates of childhood
neglect, abuse, and trauma, as well as elevated rates of teasing.
The prevalence of body dysmorphic disorder is elevated in first-degree
relatives of individuals with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Heritability of body
dysmorphic disorder symptoms is estimated at 37%–49% in studies of adolescent and young
adult twins and may be higher in women. There is shared genetic vulnerability with OCD as well
as genetic influences that are specific to body dysmorphic disorder symptoms.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Body dysmorphic disorder has been reported internationally. Certain features of the disorder
appear cross-culturally, such as gender ratio, body areas that are the object of concern, types of
repetitive behaviors, and levels of associated distress and impairment. Other features may vary
(e.g., in some cultural contexts with a collectivistic focus, such as Japan, body dysmorphic
concerns might emphasize the fear of offending others because of the perceived deformity).
Varying cultural standards may be associated with specific body image concerns, such as
