eyelids in Japan and muscle dysmorphia in Western countries. Taijin kyofusho, included in the
traditional Japanese diagnostic system, has a subtype similar to body dysmorphic disorder:
shubo-kyofu (“the phobia of a deformed body”). For more information regarding cultural
concepts of distress, refer to the “Culture and Psychiatric Diagnosis” chapter.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Muscle dysmorphia occurs almost exclusively in men, and men are more likely to have a
comorbid substance use disorder, whereas women are more likely to have a comorbid eating
disorder. Women and men appear to have more similarities than differences in terms of most
clinical features— for example, disliked body areas, types of repetitive behaviors, symptom
severity, suicidality, comorbidity, illness course, and receipt of cosmetic procedures for body
dysmorphic disorder. However, there are some differences. For example, men are more likely to
have preoccupations with their genitals, body build (thinking they are too small or inadequately
muscular), and thinning hair, whereas women are more likely to be preoccupied with weight
(usually thinking that they weigh too much), breasts/chest, buttocks, legs, hips, and excessive
body/facial hair.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
In a systematic review and meta-analysis of 17 studies that examined suicidal thoughts and
behaviors across several countries, individuals with body dysmorphic disorder were
275
four times more likely to have experienced suicidal thoughts (pooled OR = 3.87) and 2.6 times
more likely to have made suicide attempts (pooled OR = 2.57) when compared with healthy
control subjects and individuals diagnosed with eating disorders, OCD, or any anxiety disorder.
Two general population studies in Germany found higher rates of suicidal thoughts—19% vs.
3%; 31.0% vs. 3.5%—and behaviors—7% vs. 1%; 22.2% vs. 2.1%—in individuals diagnosed
with body dysmorphic disorder than in those without the diagnosis.
Severity of body dysmorphic disorder strengthens the association of body dysmorphic
disorder with suicidal thoughts and behaviors. The relationship between body dysmorphic
disorder and elevated suicidal thoughts and behaviors is independent of comorbidity, but certain
comorbidities may further strengthen this relationship. A substantial proportion of individuals
with body dysmorphic disorder attribute suicidal thoughts or suicide attempts primarily to their
appearance concerns.
Individuals with body dysmorphic disorder have many demographic and clinical risk factors
that more generally predict suicide death, such as high rates of suicidal thoughts and suicide
attempts, unemployment, perceived abuse, poor self-esteem, and high rates of comorbid major
depressive disorder, eating disorders, and substance use disorders.
Functional Consequences of Body Dysmorphic Disorder
Nearly all individuals with body dysmorphic disorder experience impaired psychosocial
functioning because of their appearance concerns. Impairment can range from moderate (e.g.,
avoidance of some social situations) to extreme and incapacitating (e.g., being completely
