Normal appearance concerns and clearly noticeable physical defects.
Eating disorders.
Other obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
Illness anxiety disorder.
Major depressive disorder.
Anxiety disorders.
housebound).
On average, psychosocial functioning and quality of life are markedly poor. More severe
body dysmorphic disorder symptoms are associated with poorer functioning and quality of life.
Most individuals experience impairment in their job, academic, or role functioning (e.g., as a
parent or caregiver), which is often severe (e.g., performing poorly, missing school or work, not
working). About 20% of youths with body dysmorphic disorder report dropping out of school
primarily because of their body dysmorphic disorder symptoms. A high proportion of adults and
adolescents have been psychiatrically hospitalized.
Differential Diagnosis
Body 
dysmorphic 
disorder
differs from normal appearance concerns in being characterized by excessive appearance-related
preoccupations and repetitive behaviors that are time-consuming, are usually difficult to resist or
control, and cause clinically significant distress or impairment in functioning. Physical defects
that are clearly noticeable (i.e., not slight) are not diagnosed as body dysmorphic disorder.
However, skin picking as a symptom of body dysmorphic disorder can cause noticeable skin
lesions and scarring; in such cases, body dysmorphic disorder should be diagnosed.
In an individual with an eating disorder, concerns about being fat or overweight
are considered a symptom of the eating disorder rather than body dysmorphic disorder. However,
weight concerns may occur in body dysmorphic disorder. Eating disorders and body dysmorphic
disorder can be comorbid, in which case both should be diagnosed.
The preoccupations and repetitive behaviors of
body dysmorphic disorder differ from obsessions and compulsions in OCD in that the former
focus only on physical appearance. These disorders have other differences, such as poorer
insight, more frequent depression, and higher rates of suicidal
276
ideation in body dysmorphic disorder. When skin picking is intended to improve the appearance
of perceived skin defects, body dysmorphic disorder, rather than excoriation (skin-picking)
disorder, is diagnosed. When hair removal (plucking, pulling, or other types of removal) is
intended to improve perceived defects in the appearance of facial, head, or body hair, body
dysmorphic disorder is diagnosed rather than trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder).
Individuals with body dysmorphic disorder are not preoccupied with
having or acquiring a serious illness and in clinical samples do not have particularly elevated
levels of somatization.
The prominent preoccupation with appearance and excessive repetitive
behaviors in body dysmorphic disorder differentiate it from major depressive disorder. However,
major depressive disorder and depressive symptoms are common in individuals with body
dysmorphic disorder, often appearing to be secondary to the distress and impairment that body
dysmorphic disorder causes. Body dysmorphic disorder should be diagnosed in depressed
individuals if diagnostic criteria for body dysmorphic disorder are met.
Social anxiety and avoidance are common in body dysmorphic disorder.
