Psychotic disorders.
Other disorders and symptoms.
However, unlike social anxiety disorder, agoraphobia, and avoidant personality disorder, body
dysmorphic disorder includes prominent appearance-related preoccupation, which may be
delusional, and repetitive behaviors. In addition, the social anxiety and avoidance that are
characteristic of body dysmorphic disorder are attributable to concerns about perceived
appearance defects and the belief or fear that other people will consider these individuals ugly,
ridicule them, or reject them because of their physical features. Unlike generalized anxiety
disorder, anxiety and worry in body dysmorphic disorder focus on perceived appearance flaws.
Many individuals with body dysmorphic disorder have delusional
appearance beliefs (i.e., complete conviction that their view of their perceived defects is
accurate), which is diagnosed as body dysmorphic disorder, with absent insight/delusional
beliefs, not as delusional disorder. Appearance-related ideas or delusions of reference are
common in body dysmorphic disorder (i.e., thinking that other people take special notice in a
negative way because of the individual’s appearance). However, unlike schizophrenia or
schizoaffective 
disorder, 
body 
dysmorphic 
disorder 
involves 
prominent 
appearance
preoccupations and related repetitive behaviors; disorganized behavior and other psychotic
symptoms are absent (except for appearance beliefs, which may be delusional). For individuals
whose obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms warrant the “with absent
insight/delusional beliefs” specifier, these symptoms should not be diagnosed as a psychotic
disorder.
Body dysmorphic disorder should not be diagnosed if the
preoccupation is limited to discomfort with or a desire to be rid of one’s primary and/or
secondary sex characteristics in an individual with gender dysphoria. Nor should body
dysmorphic disorder be diagnosed if the preoccupation focuses on the belief that one emits a foul
or offensive body odor as in olfactory reference disorder (olfactory reference syndrome), which
is an example of an other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder in DSM-5. Body
integrity dysphoria (which is included in ICD-11 but not DSM-5) involves a persistent desire to
become an amputee in order to correct a mismatch between the individual’s sense of how his or
her body should be configured and his or her actual anatomical configuration. In contrast to body
dysmorphic disorder, the individual does not feel that the limb to be amputated is ugly or
defective in any way, just that it should not be there. Koro, a culturally related disorder that
usually occurs in epidemics in Southeastern Asia, consists of a fear that the penis (labia, nipples,
or breasts in females) is shrinking or retracting and will disappear into the abdomen, often
accompanied by a belief that death
277
will result. Koro differs from body dysmorphic disorder in several ways, including a focus on
death rather than preoccupation with perceived ugliness. Dysmorphic concern (which is not a
DSM-5 disorder) is a broader construct that is similar to, but not equivalent to, body dysmorphic
disorder. It involves symptoms reflecting an overconcern with slight or imagined flaws in
appearance.
Comorbidity
Major depressive disorder is the most common comorbid disorder, with onset usually after that
