F42.3
of body dysmorphic disorder. Comorbid social anxiety disorder, OCD, and substance-related
disorders (including use of anabolic-androgenic steroids in the muscle dysmorphia form of body
dysmorphic disorder) are also common.
Hoarding Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Persistent difficulty discarding or parting with possessions, regardless of their
actual value.
B. This difficulty is due to a perceived need to save the items and to distress
associated with discarding them.
C. The difficulty discarding possessions results in the accumulation of possessions
that congest and clutter active living areas and substantially compromises their
intended use. If living areas are uncluttered, it is only because of the
interventions of third parties (e.g., family members, cleaners, authorities).
D. The hoarding causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning (including maintaining a
safe environment for self and others).
E. The hoarding is not attributable to another medical condition (e.g., brain injury,
cerebrovascular disease, Prader-Willi syndrome).
F. The hoarding is not better explained by the symptoms of another mental disorder
(e.g., obsessions in obsessive-compulsive disorder, decreased energy in major
depressive disorder, delusions in schizophrenia or another psychotic disorder,
cognitive deficits in major neurocognitive disorder, restricted interests in autism
spectrum disorder).
Specify if:
With excessive acquisition: If difficulty discarding possessions is accompanied
by excessive acquisition of items that are not needed or for which there is no
available space.
Specify if:
With good or fair insight: The individual recognizes that hoarding-related
beliefs and behaviors (pertaining to difficulty discarding items, clutter, or
excessive acquisition) are problematic.
With poor insight: The individual is mostly convinced that hoarding-related
beliefs and behaviors (pertaining to difficulty discarding items, clutter, or
excessive acquisition) are not problematic despite evidence to the contrary.
With absent insight/delusional beliefs: The individual is completely convinced
that hoarding-related beliefs and behaviors (pertaining to difficulty discarding
items, clutter, or excessive acquisition) are not problematic despite evidence to
the contrary.
