With excessive acquisition.
278
Specifiers
Approximately 80%–90% of individuals with hoarding disorder
display excessive acquisition. The most frequent form of acquisition is excessive buying,
followed by acquisition of free items (e.g., leaflets, items discarded by others). Stealing is less
common. Some individuals may deny excessive acquisition when first assessed, yet it may
appear later during the course of treatment. Individuals with hoarding disorder typically
experience distress if they are unable to or are prevented from acquiring items.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of hoarding disorder is persistent difficulty discarding or parting with
possessions, regardless of their actual value (Criterion A). The term persistent indicates a long-
standing difficulty rather than more transient life circumstances that may lead to excessive
clutter, such as inheriting property. The difficulty in discarding possessions noted in Criterion A
refers to any form of discarding, including throwing away, selling, giving away, or recycling.
The main reasons given for this difficulty are the perceived utility or aesthetic value of the items
or strong sentimental attachment to the possessions. Some individuals feel responsible for the
fate of their possessions and often go to great lengths to avoid being wasteful. Fears of losing
important information are also common. The most commonly saved items are newspapers,
magazines, clothing, bags, books, mail, and papers, but virtually any item can be saved. The
nature of items is not limited to possessions that most other people would define as useless or of
limited value. Many individuals collect and save large numbers of valuable things as well, which
are often found in piles mixed with other less valuable items.
Individuals with hoarding disorder purposefully save possessions and experience distress
(e.g., anxiety, frustration, regret, sadness, guilt) when facing the prospect of discarding them
(Criterion B). This criterion emphasizes that the saving of possessions is intentional, which
discriminates hoarding disorder from other forms of psychopathology that are characterized by
the passive accumulation of items or the absence of distress when possessions are removed.
Individuals accumulate large numbers of items that fill up and clutter active living areas to
the extent that their intended use is no longer possible (Criterion C). For example, the individual
may not be able to cook in the kitchen, sleep in his or her bed, or sit in a chair. If the space can
be used, it is only with great difficulty. Clutter is defined as a large group of usually unrelated or
marginally related objects piled together in a disorganized fashion in spaces designed for other
purposes (e.g., tabletops, floor, hallway). Criterion C emphasizes the “active” living areas of the
home, rather than more peripheral areas, such as garages, attics, or basements, that are sometimes
cluttered in homes of individuals without hoarding disorder. However, individuals with hoarding
disorder often have possessions that spill beyond the active living areas and can occupy and
impair the use of other spaces, such as vehicles, yards, the workplace, and friends’ and relatives’
houses. In some cases, living areas may be uncluttered only because of the intervention of third
parties (e.g., family members, cleaners, local authorities). Individuals who have been forced to
clear their homes still have a symptom picture that meets criteria for hoarding disorder because
