the lack of clutter is attributable to a third-party intervention. Hoarding disorder contrasts with
normative collecting behavior, which is organized and selective, although in some cases the
actual amount of possessions may be similar to the amount accumulated by an individual with
hoarding disorder. Normative collecting does not produce the clutter, distress, or impairment
typical of hoarding disorder.
Symptoms (i.e., difficulty discarding and/or clutter) must cause clinically significant distress
or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning, including
maintaining a safe environment for self and others (Criterion D). In some cases, particularly
when there is poor insight, the individual may not report distress, and the
279
impairment may be apparent only to those around the individual. However, any attempts to
discard or clear the possessions by third parties result in high levels of distress.
Associated Features
Other common features of hoarding disorder include indecisiveness, perfectionism, avoidance,
procrastination, difficulty planning and organizing tasks, and distractibility. Some individuals
with hoarding disorder live in unsanitary conditions that may be a logical consequence of
severely cluttered spaces and/or that are related to planning and organizing difficulties. Animal
hoarding can be defined as the accumulation of a large number of animals and a failure to
provide minimal standards of nutrition, sanitation, and veterinary care, as well as failure to act on
the deteriorating condition of the animals (including disease, starvation, or death) and the
environment (e.g., severe overcrowding, extremely unsanitary conditions). Animal hoarding may
be a special manifestation of hoarding disorder. Many individuals who hoard animals also hoard
inanimate objects. The most prominent differences between animal and object hoarding are the
extent of unsanitary conditions and the poorer insight in animal hoarding.
Prevalence
Nationally representative prevalence studies of hoarding disorder are not available. Community
surveys estimate the point prevalence of clinically significant hoarding in the United States and
Europe to range between 1.5% and 6%. In a meta-analysis of 12 studies across high-income
countries, a prevalence of 2.5% was found, with no gender difference identified. This contrasts
with clinical samples, which are predominantly women. In one population-based study in the
Netherlands, hoarding symptoms appeared to be almost three times more prevalent in older
adults (older than 65 years) compared with younger adults (ages 30–40 years).
Development and Course
Hoarding appears to begin early in life and spans well into the late stages. Hoarding symptoms
may first emerge around ages 15–19 years, start interfering with the individual’s everyday
functioning by the mid-20s, and cause clinically significant impairment by the mid-30s.
Participants in clinical research studies are usually in their 50s. Thus, the severity of hoarding
increases with each decade of life, especially after age 30. Once symptoms begin, the course of
hoarding is often chronic, with few individuals reporting a waxing and waning course.
