Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Pathological hoarding in children appears to be easily distinguished from developmentally
adaptive saving and collecting behaviors. Because children and adolescents typically do not
control their living environment and discarding behaviors, the possible intervention of third
parties (e.g., parents keeping the spaces usable and thus reducing interference) should be
considered when making the diagnosis.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Indecisiveness is a prominent feature of individuals with hoarding disorder and
their first-degree relatives.
Individuals with hoarding disorder often retrospectively report stressful and
traumatic life events preceding the onset of the disorder or causing an exacerbation.
Hoarding behavior is familial; more than 50% of individuals who hoard
report having a relative who also hoards. Twin studies indicate that approximately 50% of the
variability in hoarding behavior is attributable to additive genetic factors and the rest to
nonshared environmental factors.
280
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
While most of the research has been done in Western, industrialized countries and urban
communities, the available data from low- and middle-income countries suggest that hoarding
has consistent clinical features cross-culturally, including similarities in severity at clinical
presentation and associated cognitions and behaviors. In cultural contexts in which a high value
is placed on thrift and storing of possessions, the presence of distress and functional impairment
should be the basis for the diagnosis.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
The key features of hoarding disorder (i.e., difficulty discarding, excessive amount of clutter) are
generally comparable in men and women, but women tend to display more excessive acquisition,
particularly excessive buying, than do men.
Functional Consequences of Hoarding Disorder
Clutter impairs basic activities, such as moving through the house, cooking, cleaning,
maintaining personal hygiene, and even sleeping. Appliances may be broken, and utilities such
as water and electricity may be disconnected, as access for repair work may be difficult. Quality
of life is often considerably impaired. In severe cases, hoarding can put individuals at risk for
fire, falling (especially elderly individuals), poor sanitation, and other health risks. Hoarding
disorder is associated with occupational impairment, poor physical health, and high social
service utilization. Family relationships are frequently under great strain. Conflict with neighbors
and local authorities is common, and a substantial proportion of individuals with severe hoarding
disorder have been involved in legal eviction proceedings, and some have a history of eviction.
Differential Diagnosis
