Other medical conditions.
Neurodevelopmental disorders.
Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
Major depressive episode.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Neurocognitive disorders.
Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the symptoms are judged to be a
direct consequence of another medical condition (Criterion E), such as traumatic brain injury,
surgical resection for treatment of a tumor or seizure control, cerebrovascular disease, infections
of the central nervous system (e.g., herpes simplex encephalitis), or neurogenetic conditions such
as Prader-Willi syndrome. Damage to the anterior ventromedial prefrontal and cingulate cortices
has been particularly associated with the excessive accumulation of objects. In these individuals,
the hoarding behavior is not present prior to the onset of the brain damage and appears shortly
after the brain damage occurs. Some of these individuals appear to have little interest in the
accumulated items and are able to discard them easily or do not care if others discard them,
whereas others appear to be very reluctant to discard anything.
Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the accumulation of objects
is judged to be a direct consequence of a neurodevelopmental disorder, such as autism spectrum
disorder or intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability).
Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the
accumulation of objects is judged to be a direct consequence of delusions or negative symptoms
in schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the accumulation of objects is
judged to be a direct consequence of psychomotor retardation, fatigue, or loss of energy during a
major depressive episode.
Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the symptoms are judged to
be a direct consequence of typical obsessions or compulsions, such as fears of contamination,
harm, or feelings of incompleteness in obsessive-compulsive disorder
281
(OCD). Feelings of incompleteness (e.g., losing one’s identity, or having to document and
preserve all life experiences) are the most frequent OCD symptoms associated with this form of
hoarding. The accumulation of objects can also be the result of persistently avoiding onerous
rituals (e.g., not discarding objects in order to avoid endless washing or checking rituals).
In OCD, the behavior is generally unwanted and highly distressing, and the individual
experiences no pleasure or reward from it. Excessive acquisition is usually not present; if
excessive acquisition is present, items are acquired because of a specific obsession (e.g., the need
to buy items that have been accidentally touched in order to avoid contaminating other people),
not because of a genuine desire to possess the items. Individuals who hoard in the context of
OCD are also more likely to accumulate bizarre items, such as trash, feces, urine, fingernail and
toenail cuttings, hair, used diapers, or rotten food. Accumulation of such items is very unusual in
hoarding disorder.
When severe hoarding appears concurrently with other typical symptoms of OCD but is
judged to be independent from these symptoms, both hoarding disorder and OCD may be
diagnosed.
Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the accumulation of objects is
judged to be a direct consequence of a degenerative disorder, such as neurocognitive disorder
associated with frontotemporal degeneration or Alzheimer’s disease. Typically, onset of the
accumulating behavior is gradual and follows onset of the neurocognitive disorder. The
