F63.3
accumulating behavior may be accompanied by self-neglect and severe domestic squalor,
alongside other neuropsychiatric symptoms, such as disinhibition, gambling, rituals/stereotypies,
tics, and self-injurious behaviors.
Comorbidity
Approximately 75% of individuals with hoarding disorder have a comorbid mood or anxiety
disorder. The most common comorbid conditions are major depressive disorder (30%–50%),
social anxiety disorder, and generalized anxiety disorder. Approximately 20% of individuals
with hoarding disorder also have symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria for OCD. These
comorbidities may often be the main reason for consultation, because individuals are unlikely to
spontaneously report hoarding symptoms, and hoarding symptoms are often not asked about in
routine clinical interviews.
Trichotillomania (Hair-Pulling Disorder)
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recurrent pulling out of one’s hair, resulting in hair loss.
B. Repeated attempts to decrease or stop hair pulling.
C. The hair pulling causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The hair pulling or hair loss is not attributable to another medical condition (e.g.,
a dermatological condition).
E. The hair pulling is not better explained by the symptoms of another mental
disorder (e.g., attempts to improve a perceived defect or flaw in appearance in
body dysmorphic disorder).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder) is the recurrent pulling out of
one’s own hair (Criterion A). Hair pulling may occur from any region of the body in
282
which hair grows; the most common sites are the scalp, eyebrows, and eyelids, while less
common sites are axillary, facial, pubic, and perirectal regions. Hair-pulling sites may vary over
time. Hair pulling may occur in brief episodes scattered throughout the day or during less
frequent but more sustained periods that can continue for hours, and such hair pulling may
endure for months or years. Criterion A requires that hair pulling lead to hair loss, although
individuals with this disorder may pull hair in a widely distributed pattern (i.e., pulling single
hairs from all over a site) such that hair loss may not be clearly visible. In addition, individuals
may attempt to conceal or camouflage hair loss (e.g., by using makeup, scarves, or wigs).
