Individuals with trichotillomania have made repeated attempts to decrease or stop hair pulling
(Criterion B). Criterion C indicates that hair pulling causes clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. The term distress
includes negative affects that may be experienced by individuals with hair pulling, such as
feeling a loss of control, embarrassment, and shame. Significant impairment may occur in
several different areas of functioning (e.g., social, occupational, academic, and leisure), in part
because of avoidance of work, school, or other public situations.
Associated Features
Hair pulling may be accompanied by a range of behaviors or rituals involving hair. Thus,
individuals may search for a particular kind of hair to pull (e.g., hairs with a specific texture or
color), may try to pull out hair in a specific way (e.g., so that the root comes out intact), or may
visually examine or tactilely or orally manipulate the hair after it has been pulled (e.g., rolling the
hair between the fingers, pulling the strand between the teeth, biting the hair into pieces, or
swallowing the hair).
Hair pulling may also be preceded or accompanied by various emotional states; it may be
triggered by feelings of anxiety or boredom, may be preceded by an increasing sense of tension
(either immediately before pulling out the hair or when attempting to resist the urge to pull), or
may lead to gratification, pleasure, or a sense of relief when the hair is pulled out. Hair-pulling
behavior may involve varying degrees of conscious awareness, with some individuals displaying
more focused attention on the hair pulling (with preceding tension and subsequent relief), and
other individuals displaying more automatic behavior (in which the hair pulling seems to occur
without full awareness). Many individuals report a mix of both behavioral styles. Some
individuals experience an “itch-like” or tingling sensation in the scalp that is alleviated by the act
of pulling hair. Pain does not usually accompany hair pulling.
Patterns of hair loss are highly variable. Areas of complete alopecia, as well as areas of
thinned hair density, are common. When the scalp is involved, there may be a predilection for
pulling out hair in the crown or parietal regions. There may be a pattern of nearly complete
baldness except for a narrow perimeter around the outer margins of the scalp, particularly at the
nape of the neck (“tonsure trichotillomania”). Eyebrows and eyelashes may be completely
absent.
Hair pulling does not usually occur in the presence of other individuals, except immediate
family members. Some individuals have urges to pull hair from other individuals and may
sometimes try to find opportunities to do so surreptitiously. Some individuals may pull hairs
from pets, dolls, and other fibrous materials (e.g., sweaters or carpets). Some individuals may
deny their hair pulling to others. The majority of individuals with trichotillomania also have one
or more other body-focused repetitive behaviors, including skin picking, nail biting, and lip
chewing.
Prevalence
In the general population, data from nonrepresentative U.S. samples have suggested that the 12-
month prevalence estimate for trichotillomania in adults and adolescents may be in
283
