Genetic and physiological.
the range of 1% to 2%. Women are more frequently affected than men in self-identified or
clinical samples, at a ratio estimated at 10:1 or greater, but the gender ratio may be closer to 2:1
in community samples. Among children with trichotillomania, boys and girls are more equally
represented. An online survey of more than 10,000 adults ages 18–69 years, representative of the
general U.S. population, found that 1.7% identified as having current trichotillomania and that
rates did not differ significantly based on gender (1.8% of men and 1.7% of women).
Development and Course
Hair pulling may be seen in infants, and this behavior typically resolves during early
development. Onset of hair pulling in trichotillomania most commonly coincides with, or follows
the onset of, puberty. Sites of hair pulling may vary over time. The usual course of
trichotillomania is chronic, with some waxing and waning if the disorder is untreated. Symptoms
may worsen in females premenstrually but not consistently during pregnancy. For some
individuals, the disorder may come and go for weeks, months, or years at a time. A minority of
individuals remit without subsequent relapse within a few years of onset.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
There is evidence for a genetic vulnerability to trichotillomania. The
disorder is more common in individuals with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and their
first-degree relatives than in the general population.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Trichotillomania appears to manifest similarly across cultures and ethnicities, although there is a
paucity of data from non-Western regions.
Diagnostic Markers
Most individuals with trichotillomania admit to hair pulling; thus, dermatopathological diagnosis
is rarely required. Skin biopsy and dermoscopy (or trichoscopy) of trichotillomania are able to
differentiate the disorder from other causes of alopecia. In trichotillomania, dermoscopy shows a
range of characteristic features, including decreased hair density, short vellus hair, and broken
hairs with different shaft lengths.
Functional Consequences of Trichotillomania (Hair-Pulling Disorder)
Trichotillomania is associated with distress as well as with social and occupational impairment.
There may be irreversible damage to hair growth and hair quality. Infrequent medical
consequences of trichotillomania include digit purpura, musculoskeletal injury (e.g., carpal
tunnel syndrome; back, shoulder and neck pain), blepharitis, and dental damage (e.g., worn or
broken teeth resulting from hair biting). Swallowing of hair (trichophagia) may lead to
trichobezoars, with subsequent anemia, abdominal pain, hematemesis, nausea and vomiting,
bowel obstruction, and even bowel perforation.
Differential Diagnosis
