Normative hair removal/manipulation.
Other obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
Stereotypic movement disorder.
Psychotic disorder.
Another medical condition.
Substance-related disorders.
F42.4
Trichotillomania should not be diagnosed when hair removal
is performed solely for cosmetic reasons (i.e., to improve physical appearance). Many
individuals twist and play with their hair, but this behavior does not usually qualify for a
diagnosis of trichotillomania. Some individuals may bite rather than pull hair; again, this does
not qualify for a diagnosis of trichotillomania.
284
Individuals with OCD and symmetry concerns
may pull out hairs as part of their symmetry rituals, and individuals with body dysmorphic
disorder may remove body hair that they perceive as ugly, asymmetrical, or abnormal; in such
cases a diagnosis of trichotillomania is not given.
Stereotypic movement disorder can sometimes involve hair-
pulling behavior. For example, a child with intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual
disability) or autism spectrum disorder may engage in stereotypic head banging, hand or arm
biting, and hair pulling when frustrated or angry, and sometimes when excited. This behavior, if
impairing, would be diagnosed as stereotypic movement disorder (co-occurring with intellectual
developmental disorder or autism spectrum disorder) rather than trichotillomania.
Individuals with a psychotic disorder may remove hair in response to a
delusion or hallucination. Trichotillomania is not diagnosed in such cases.
Trichotillomania is not diagnosed if the hair pulling or hair loss is
attributable to another medical condition (e.g., inflammation of the skin or other dermatological
conditions). Other causes of noncicatricial (nonscarring) alopecia (e.g., alopecia areata,
androgenic alopecia, telogen effluvium) or cicatricial (scarring) (e.g., chronic discoid lupus
erythematosus, lichen planopilaris, central centrifugal cicatricial alopecia, pseudopelade,
folliculitis decalvans, dissecting folliculitis, acne keloidalis nuchae) should be considered in
individuals with hair loss who deny hair pulling. Skin biopsy or dermoscopy can be used to
differentiate individuals with trichotillomania from those with dermatological disorders.
Hair-pulling symptoms may be exacerbated by certain substances—
for example, stimulants—but it is less likely that substances are the primary cause of persistent
hair pulling.
Comorbidity
Trichotillomania is often accompanied by other mental disorders, most commonly major
depressive disorder and excoriation (skin-picking) disorder. Repetitive body-focused symptoms
other than hair pulling or skin picking (e.g., nail biting) occur in the majority of individuals with
trichotillomania and may deserve an additional diagnosis of other specified obsessive-
compulsive and related disorder (i.e., other body-focused repetitive behavior disorder).
Excoriation (Skin-Picking) Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
