A. Recurrent skin picking resulting in skin lesions.
B. Repeated attempts to decrease or stop skin picking.
C. The skin picking causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The skin picking is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., cocaine) or another medical condition (e.g., scabies).
E. The skin picking is not better explained by symptoms of another mental disorder
(e.g., delusions or tactile hallucinations in a psychotic disorder, attempts to
improve a perceived defect or flaw in appearance in body dysmorphic disorder,
stereotypies in stereotypic movement disorder, or intention to harm oneself in
nonsuicidal self-injury).
285
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of excoriation (skin-picking) disorder is recurrent picking at one’s own skin
(Criterion A). The most commonly picked sites are the face, arms, and hands, but many
individuals pick from multiple body sites. Individuals may pick at healthy skin, at minor skin
irregularities, at lesions such as pimples or calluses, or at scabs from previous picking. Most
individuals pick with their fingernails, although many use tweezers, pins, or other objects. In
addition to skin picking, there may be skin rubbing, squeezing, lancing, and biting. Individuals
with excoriation disorder often spend significant amounts of time on their picking behavior,
sometimes several hours per day, and such skin picking may endure for months or years.
Criterion A requires that skin picking lead to skin lesions, although individuals with this disorder
often attempt to conceal or camouflage such lesions (e.g., with makeup or clothing). Individuals
with excoriation disorder have made repeated attempts to decrease or stop skin picking (Criterion
B).
Criterion C indicates that skin picking causes clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. The term distress includes negative
affects that may be experienced by individuals with skin picking, such as feeling a loss of
control, embarrassment, and shame. Significant impairment may occur in several different areas
of functioning (e.g., social, occupational, academic, and leisure), in part because of avoidance of
social situations.
Associated Features
Skin picking may be accompanied by a range of behaviors or rituals involving skin or scabs.
Thus, individuals may search for a particular kind of scab to pull, and they may examine, play
with, or mouth or swallow the skin after it has been pulled. Skin picking may also be preceded or
accompanied by various emotional states. Skin picking may be triggered by feelings of anxiety
or boredom, may be preceded by an increasing sense of tension (either immediately before
picking the skin or when attempting to resist the urge to pick), and may lead to gratification,
pleasure, or a sense of relief when the skin or scab has been picked. Some individuals report
