Genetic and physiological.
picking in response to a minor skin irregularity or to relieve an uncomfortable bodily sensation.
Pain is not routinely reported to accompany skin picking. Some individuals engage in skin
picking that is more focused (i.e., with preceding tension and subsequent relief), whereas others
engage in more automatic picking (i.e., when skin picking occurs without preceding tension and
without full awareness), and many have a mix of both behavioral styles. Skin picking does not
usually occur in the presence of other individuals, except immediate family members. Some
individuals report picking the skin of others.
Prevalence
An online survey of more than 10,000 adults, ages 18–69 years, age- and gender-matched to the
U.S. population, found that 2.1% identified as having current excoriation disorder and 3.1%
reported lifetime excoriation disorder. Three-quarters or more of individuals with the disorder are
women in community samples.
Development and Course
Although individuals with excoriation disorder may present at various ages, the skin picking
most often has onset during adolescence, commonly coinciding with or following the onset of
puberty. The disorder frequently begins with a dermatological condition, such as acne. Sites of
skin picking may vary over time. The usual course is chronic, with some waxing and waning if
untreated. For some individuals, the disorder may come and go for weeks, months, or years at a
time.
286
Risk and Prognostic Factors
There is evidence for a genetic vulnerability to excoriation disorder.
The disorder is more common in individuals with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and
their first-degree family members than in the general population.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
There are limited data on the prevalence and clinical characteristics of excoriation disorder
across cultures. However, clinical features appear similar in studies of individuals in the United
States and other countries.
Diagnostic Markers
Most individuals with excoriation disorder admit to skin picking; therefore, dermatopathological
diagnosis is rarely required. However, the disorder may have characteristic features on
histopathology.
Functional Consequences of Excoriation (Skin-Picking) Disorder
Excoriation disorder is associated with social and occupational impairment. The majority of
individuals with this condition spend at least 1 hour per day picking, thinking about picking, and
resisting urges to pick. Many individuals report avoiding social or entertainment events as well
