Psychotic disorder.
Other obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
Neurodevelopmental disorders.
Dermatitis artefacta.
Other disorders.
Other medical conditions.
as going out in public. A majority of individuals with the disorder also report experiencing work
interference from skin picking on at least a daily or weekly basis. A significant proportion of
students with excoriation disorder report having missed school, having experienced difficulties
managing responsibilities at school, or having had difficulties studying because of skin picking.
Medical complications of skin picking include tissue damage, scarring, and infection and can be
life-threatening. Rarely, synovitis of the wrists resulting from chronic picking has been reported.
Skin picking often results in significant tissue damage and scarring. It frequently requires
antibiotic treatment for infection, and on occasion it may require surgery.
Differential Diagnosis
Skin picking may occur in response to a delusion (i.e., parasitosis) or tactile
hallucination (i.e., formication) in a psychotic disorder. In such cases, excoriation disorder
should not be diagnosed.
Excessive washing compulsions in response to
contamination obsessions in individuals with OCD may lead to skin lesions, and skin picking
may occur in individuals with body dysmorphic disorder who pick their skin because of
appearance concerns; in such cases, excoriation disorder should not be diagnosed. The
description of other body-focused repetitive behavior disorder in other specified obsessive-
compulsive and related disorder excludes individuals whose symptoms meet diagnostic criteria
for excoriation disorder.
While stereotypic movement disorder may be characterized by
repetitive self-injurious behavior, onset is in the early developmental period. For example,
individuals with the neurogenetic condition Prader-Willi syndrome may have early onset of skin
picking, and their symptoms may meet criteria for stereotypic movement disorder. While tics in
individuals with Tourette’s disorder may lead to self-injury, the behavior is not tic-like in
excoriation disorder.
287
Dermatitis artefacta (also referred to as “factitious dermatitis”) is a term used
in dermatology to refer to medically unexplained, presumably self-induced skin lesions that the
individual denies any role in creating. Cases in which there is evidence of deception on the
individual’s part concerning the skin lesions can be diagnosed as either malingering (if the skin
picking is motivated by external incentives) or factitious disorder (if the skin picking occurs in
the absence of obvious external rewards). In the absence of deception, excoriation disorder can
be diagnosed if there are repeated attempts to decrease or stop skin picking.
Excoriation disorder is not diagnosed if the skin picking is primarily attributable
to the intention to harm oneself that is characteristic of nonsuicidal self-injury.
Excoriation disorder is not diagnosed if the skin picking is primarily
attributable to another medical condition. For example, scabies is a dermatological condition
invariably associated with severe itching and scratching. However, excoriation disorder may be
precipitated or exacerbated by an underlying dermatological condition. For example, acne may
lead to some scratching and picking, which may also be associated with comorbid excoriation
