Substance/medication-induced disorders.
disorder (so-called acne excoriée). The differentiation between these two clinical situations (acne
with some scratching and picking vs. acne with comorbid excoriation disorder) requires an
assessment of the extent to which the individual’s skin picking has become independent of the
underlying dermatological condition.
Skin-picking symptoms may also be induced by certain
substances (e.g., cocaine), in which case excoriation disorder should not be diagnosed. If such
skin picking is clinically significant, then a diagnosis of substance/medication-induced
obsessive-compulsive and related disorder should be considered.
Comorbidity
Excoriation disorder is often accompanied by other mental disorders. Such disorders include
OCD and trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder), as well as major depressive disorder.
Depression comorbidity seems to be more common in women. Repetitive body-focused
symptoms other than skin picking and hair pulling (e.g., nail biting) occur in many individuals
with excoriation disorder and may deserve an additional diagnosis of other specified obsessive-
compulsive and related disorder (i.e., other body-focused repetitive behavior disorder).
Substance/Medication-Induced Obsessive-Compulsive
and Related Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Obsessions, compulsions, skin picking, hair pulling, other body-focused
repetitive behaviors, or other symptoms characteristic of the obsessive-
compulsive and related disorders predominate in the clinical picture.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
of both (1) and (2):
1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance
intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a
medication.
2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in
Criterion A.
288
C. The disturbance is not better explained by an obsessive-compulsive and related
disorder that is not substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an
independent obsessive-compulsive and related disorder could include the
following:
The symptoms precede the onset of the substance/medication use; the
symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after
