the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other
evidence 
suggesting 
the 
existence 
of 
an 
independent 
non-
substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder
(e.g., a history of recurrent non-substance/medication-related episodes).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Note: This diagnosis should be made in addition to a diagnosis of substance
intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A
predominate in the clinical picture and are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical
attention.
Coding note: The ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance/medication]-induced
obsessive-compulsive and related disorders are indicated in the table below. Note
that the ICD-10-CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance
use disorder present for the same class of substance. In any case, an additional
separate diagnosis of a substance use disorder is not given. If a mild substance use
disorder is comorbid with the substance-induced obsessive-compulsive and related
disorder, the 4th position character is “1,” and the clinician should record “mild
[substance] use disorder” before the substance-induced obsessive-compulsive and
related disorder (e.g., “mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced obsessive-
compulsive and related disorder”). If a moderate or severe substance use disorder is
comorbid with the substance-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder,
the 4th position character is “2,” and the clinician should record “moderate
[substance] use disorder” or “severe [substance] use disorder,” depending on the
severity of the comorbid substance use disorder. If there is no comorbid substance
use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the substance), then the 4th
position character is “9,” and the clinician should record only the substance-induced
obsessive-compulsive and related disorder.
ICD-10-CM
With mild use
disorder
With moderate or
severe use disorder
Without use
disorder
Amphetamine-type substance (or other
stimulant)
F15.188
F15.288
F15.988
Cocaine
F14.188
F14.288
F14.988
Other (or unknown) substance
F19.188
F19.288
F19.988
Specify (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders,”
which indicates whether “with onset during intoxication” and/or “with onset during
withdrawal” applies to a given substance class; or specify “with onset after
medication use”):
With onset during intoxication: If criteria are met for intoxication with the
substance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
