289
With onset during withdrawal: If criteria are met for withdrawal from the
substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
With onset after medication use: If symptoms developed at initiation of
medication, with a change in use of medication, or during withdrawal of
medication.
Recording Procedures
The name of the substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder begins
with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine) that is presumed to be causing the obsessive-
compulsive and related symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the
criteria set, which is based on the drug class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance
use disorder. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., ropinirole), the code for
“other (or unknown) substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to
be an etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown, the same code should also
be used.
To record the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is listed
first, followed by “with substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related
disorder” (incorporating the name of the specific etiological substance/medication), followed by
the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication, onset during withdrawal, with onset
after medication use). For example, in the case of repetitive skin-picking occurring during
intoxication in a man with a severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is F14.288 severe cocaine
use disorder with cocaine-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder, with onset during
intoxication. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe cocaine use disorder is not given. If the
substance-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder occurs without a comorbid
substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the substance), no accompanying
substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F15.988 amphetamine-induced obsessive-compulsive and
related disorder, with onset during intoxication). When more than one substance is judged to play
a significant role in the development of the obsessive-compulsive and related disorder, each
should be listed separately.
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related
disorder are prominent symptoms of an obsessive-compulsive and related disorder (Criterion A)
that are judged to be attributable to the effects of a substance (e.g., drug of abuse, medication).
The obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms must have developed during or soon
after substance intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a medication
or toxin, and the substance/medication must be capable of producing the symptoms (Criterion
B). Substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to a prescribed
treatment for a mental disorder or other medical condition must have its onset while the
individual is receiving the medication. Once the treatment is discontinued, the obsessive-
compulsive and related disorder symptoms will usually improve or remit within days to weeks
