Substance intoxication and substance withdrawal.
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder (i.e., not induced by a substance).
(depending on the half-life of the substance/medication and the presence of withdrawal). The
diagnosis of substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder should not
be given if onset of the obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms precedes the
substance/medication use, or if the symptoms persist for a substantial period of time, usually
longer than 1 month, from the time of severe intoxication or withdrawal. The
substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder diagnosis should be
made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the
symptoms in Criterion A predominate in the clinical picture and are sufficiently severe to
warrant independent clinical attention.
290
Associated Features
Obsessions, compulsions, hair pulling, skin picking, or other body-focused repetitive behaviors
can occur in association with intoxication with the following classes of substances: stimulants
(including cocaine) and other (or unknown) substances. Heavy metals and toxins may also cause
obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms.
Prevalence
In the U.S. general population, the very limited data that are available indicate that
substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder is very rare.
Differential Diagnosis
Obsessive-compulsive 
and 
related 
disorder
symptoms may occur in the context of substance intoxication and substance withdrawal. The
diagnosis of the substance-specific intoxication or substance-specific withdrawal will usually
suffice to categorize the symptom presentation. A diagnosis of substance/medication-induced
obsessive-compulsive and related disorder either with onset during intoxication or with onset
during withdrawal should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance
withdrawal if the obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms are judged to be in excess
of those usually associated with intoxication or withdrawal and are sufficiently severe to warrant
clinical attention.
Substance/medication-
induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder is distinguished from a primary obsessive-
compulsive and related disorder by considering the onset, course, and other factors with respect
to substances/medications. For drugs of abuse, there must be evidence from the history, physical
examination, or laboratory findings for use or intoxication. Substance/medication-induced
obsessive-compulsive and related disorder arises only in association with intoxication, whereas a
primary 
obsessive-compulsive 
and 
related 
disorder 
may 
precede 
the 
onset 
of
substance/medication use. The presence of features that are atypical of a primary obsessive-
compulsive and related disorder, such as atypical age at onset of symptoms, may suggest a
substance-induced etiology. A primary obsessive-compulsive and related disorder diagnosis is
warranted if the symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (about 1 month or longer) after
