Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another medical condition.
Delirium.
F06.8
the end of the substance intoxication or the individual has a history of an obsessive-compulsive
and related disorder.
If 
the 
obsessive-
compulsive and related symptoms are attributable to another medical condition (i.e., rather than
to the medication taken for the other medical condition), obsessive-compulsive and related
disorder due to another medical condition should be diagnosed. The history often provides the
basis for judgment. At times, a change in the treatment for the other medical condition (e.g.,
medication substitution or discontinuation) may be needed to determine whether the medication
is the causative agent (in which case the symptoms may be better explained by
substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder). If the disturbance is
attributable to both another medical condition and substance use, both diagnoses (i.e., obsessive-
compulsive and related disorder due to another medical condition and substance/medication-
induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder) may be given. When there is insufficient
evidence to determine whether the symptoms are attributable to a substance/medication or to
another medical condition or are primary (i.e., attributable to neither a substance/medication nor
another medical condition), a diagnosis of other specified or unspecified obsessive-compulsive
and related disorder would be indicated.
291
If obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms occur exclusively during the
course of delirium, they are considered to be an associated feature of the delirium and are not
diagnosed separately.
Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorder Due to
Another Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Obsessions, compulsions, preoccupations with appearance, hoarding, skin
picking, hair pulling, other body-focused repetitive behaviors, or other symptoms
characteristic of obsessive-compulsive and related disorder predominate in the
clinical picture.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another
medical condition.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder.
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
