With 
obsessive-compulsive 
disorder–like 
symptoms: 
If 
obsessive-
compulsive disorder–like symptoms predominate in the clinical presentation.
With appearance preoccupations: If preoccupation with perceived appearance
defects or flaws predominates in the clinical presentation.
With hoarding symptoms: If hoarding predominates in the clinical presentation.
With hair-pulling symptoms: If hair pulling predominates in the clinical
presentation.
With skin-picking symptoms: If skin picking predominates in the clinical
presentation.
Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the
mental disorder (e.g., F06.8 obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to
cerebral infarction). The other medical condition should be coded and listed
separately immediately before the obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due
to the medical condition (e.g., I69.398 cerebral infarction; F06.8 obsessive-
compulsive and related disorder due to cerebral infarction).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another medical
condition is clinically significant obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms that are judged to
be best explained as the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition.
Symptoms can include prominent obsessions, compulsions, preoccupations with appearance,
hoarding, hair pulling, skin picking, or other body-focused repetitive behaviors (Criterion A).
The judgment that the symptoms are best explained by the associated medical condition must be
based on evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings (Criterion B).
Additionally, it must be judged that the symptoms are not better explained by another mental
disorder (Criterion C). The diagnosis is not made if the obsessive-compulsive and related
symptoms occur only during the course of a delirium (Criterion D). The obsessive-compulsive
and related symptoms must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion E).
292
In determining whether the obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms are attributable to
another medical condition, a medical condition must be present at the time of the onset of the
obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms. Furthermore, it must be established that obsessive-
compulsive and related symptoms can be etiologically related to the medical condition through a
pathophysiological mechanism and that this best explains the symptoms in the individual.
Although there are no infallible guidelines for determining whether the relationship between the
obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms and the medical condition is etiological,
considerations that may provide some guidance in making this diagnosis include the presence of
a clear temporal association between the onset, exacerbation, or remission of the medical
condition and the obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms; the presence of features that are
atypical of a primary obsessive-compulsive and related disorder (e.g., atypical age at onset or
