Delirium.
course); and evidence in the literature that a known physiological mechanism (e.g., striatal
damage due to a cerebral infarction) causes obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms. In
addition, the disturbance cannot be better explained by a primary obsessive-compulsive and
related disorder, a substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder, or
another mental disorder.
There has been considerable attention to the question of whether obsessive-compulsive and
related disorders can be attributed to Group A streptococcal infection. Sydenham’s chorea is the
neurological manifestation of rheumatic fever, which is in turn due to Group A streptococcal
infection. Sydenham’s chorea is characterized by a combination of motor and nonmotor
symptoms. Nonmotor features include obsessions, compulsions, attention deficit, and emotional
lability. Although individuals with Sydenham’s chorea may present with non-neuropsychiatric
features of acute rheumatic fever, such as carditis and arthritis, they may present with obsessive-
compulsive disorder–like symptoms; such individuals should be diagnosed with obsessive-
compulsive and related disorder due to another medical condition.
Pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infections
(PANDAS) has been identified as another postinfectious autoimmune disorder characterized by
the sudden onset of obsessions, compulsions, and/or tics accompanied by a variety of acute
neuropsychiatric symptoms in the absence of chorea, carditis, or arthritis, after Group A
streptococcal infection. However, given that such acute-onset symptoms may be due to a range
of other infections or insults, the term pediatric acute-onset neuropsychiatric syndrome (PANS)
has been used. PANS is characterized by abrupt, dramatic onset of obsessive-compulsive
symptoms or severely restricted food intake, together with a range of additional neuropsychiatric
symptoms. Assessment guidelines for this syndrome are available.
Associated Features
A number of other medical conditions are known to include obsessive-compulsive and related
symptoms as a manifestation. Examples include disorders leading to striatal damage, such as
cerebral infarction or Huntington’s disorder.
Development and Course
The development and course of obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another
medical condition generally follows the course of the underlying illness.
Diagnostic Markers
Laboratory assessments and/or medical examinations are necessary to confirm the diagnosis of
another medical condition.
Differential Diagnosis
A separate diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another
medical condition is not given if the disturbance occurs exclusively during the course of a
delirium. However, a diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to
293
