predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the
obsessive-compulsive and related disorders diagnostic class. The other specified
obsessive-compulsive and related disorder category is used in situations in which
the clinician chooses to communicate the specific reason that the presentation does
not meet the criteria for any specific obsessive-compulsive and related disorder. This
is done by recording “other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder”
followed by the specific reason (e.g., “obsessional jealousy”).
294
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified”
designation include the following:
1. Body dysmorphic–like disorder with actual flaws: This is similar to body
dysmorphic disorder except that the defects or flaws in physical appearance are
clearly observable by others (i.e., they are more noticeable than “slight”). In such
cases, the preoccupation with these flaws is clearly excessive and causes
significant impairment or distress.
2. Body dysmorphic–like disorder without repetitive behaviors: Presentations
that meet body dysmorphic disorder except that the individual has never
performed repetitive behaviors or mental acts in response to the appearance
concerns.
3. Other body-focused repetitive behavior disorder: Presentations involving
recurrent body-focused repetitive behaviors other than hair pulling and skin
picking (e.g., nail biting, lip biting, cheek chewing) that are accompanied by
repeated attempts to decrease or stop the behaviors and that cause clinically
significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
of functioning.
4. Obsessional jealousy: This is characterized by nondelusional preoccupation
with a partner’s perceived infidelity. The preoccupations may lead to repetitive
behaviors or mental acts in response to the infidelity concerns; they cause
clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning; and they are not better explained by another
mental disorder such as delusional disorder, jealous type, or paranoid personality
disorder.
5. Olfactory reference disorder (olfactory reference syndrome): This is
characterized by the individual’s persistent preoccupation with the belief that he
or she emits a foul or offensive body odor that is unnoticeable or only slightly
noticeable to others; in response to this preoccupation, these individuals often
engage in repetitive and excessive behaviors such as repeatedly checking for
body odor, excessive showering, or seeking reassurance, as well as excessive
attempts to camouflage the perceived odor. These symptoms cause clinically
significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
of functioning. In traditional Japanese psychiatry, this disorder is known as
jikoshu-kyofu, a variant of taijin kyofusho (see “Culture and Psychiatric
Diagnosis” in Section III).
