F94.1
Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
Trauma- and stressor-related disorders include disorders in which
exposure to a traumatic or stressful event is listed explicitly as a diagnostic criterion. These
include reactive attachment disorder, disinhibited social engagement disorder, posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD), acute stress disorder, adjustment disorders, and prolonged grief disorder.
Placement of this chapter reflects the close relationship between these diagnoses and disorders in
the surrounding chapters on anxiety disorders, obsessive-compulsive and related disorders, and
dissociative disorders.
Psychological distress following exposure to a traumatic or stressful event is quite variable.
In some cases, symptoms can be well understood within an anxiety- or fear-based context. It is
clear, however, that many individuals who have been exposed to a traumatic or stressful event
exhibit a phenotype in which, rather than anxiety- or fear-based symptoms, the most prominent
clinical characteristics are anhedonic and dysphoric symptoms, externalizing angry and
aggressive symptoms, or dissociative symptoms. Because of these variable expressions of
clinical distress following exposure to catastrophic or aversive events, the aforementioned
disorders are grouped under a separate category: trauma- and stressor-related disorders.
Furthermore, it is not uncommon for the clinical picture to include some combination of the
above symptoms (with or without anxiety- or fear-based symptoms). Such a heterogeneous
picture has long been recognized in adjustment disorders, as well. Social neglect—that is, the
absence of adequate caregiving during childhood—is a diagnostic requirement of both reactive
attachment disorder and disinhibited social engagement disorder. Although the two disorders
share a common etiology, the former is expressed as an internalizing disorder with depressive
symptoms and withdrawn behavior, while the latter is marked by disinhibition and externalizing
behavior. Finally, it has long been recognized that whereas grief, despair, and general dysphoria
can be a part of the normal grieving process after the death of a loved one, the expression of such
emotions is sometimes abnormally excessive in duration and/or intensity. The diagnosis of
prolonged grief disorder has been introduced in this chapter to meet this clinical concern.
Reactive Attachment Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A consistent pattern of inhibited, emotionally withdrawn behavior toward adult
caregivers, manifested by both of the following:
1. The child rarely or minimally seeks comfort when distressed.
2. The child rarely or minimally responds to comfort when distressed.
