B. A persistent social and emotional disturbance characterized by at least two of
the following:
1. Minimal social and emotional responsiveness to others.
2. Limited positive affect.
296
3. Episodes of unexplained irritability, sadness, or fearfulness that are evident
even during nonthreatening interactions with adult caregivers.
C. The child has experienced a pattern of extremes of insufficient care as
evidenced by at least one of the following:
1. Social neglect or deprivation in the form of persistent lack of having basic
emotional needs for comfort, stimulation, and affection met by caregiving
adults.
2. Repeated changes of primary caregivers that limit opportunities to form stable
attachments (e.g., frequent changes in foster care).
3. Rearing in unusual settings that severely limit opportunities to form selective
attachments (e.g., institutions with high child-to-caregiver ratios).
D. The care in Criterion C is presumed to be responsible for the disturbed behavior
in Criterion A (e.g., the disturbances in Criterion A began following the lack of
adequate care in Criterion C).
E. The criteria are not met for autism spectrum disorder.
F. The disturbance is evident before age 5 years.
G. The child has a developmental age of at least 9 months.
Specify if:
Persistent: The disorder has been present for more than 12 months.
Specify current severity:
Reactive attachment disorder is specified as severe when a child exhibits all
symptoms of the disorder, with each symptom manifesting at relatively high
levels.
Diagnostic Features
Reactive attachment disorder is characterized by a pattern of markedly disturbed and
developmentally inappropriate attachment behaviors, in which a child rarely or minimally turns
preferentially to an attachment figure for comfort, support, protection, and nurturance. The
essential feature is absent or grossly underdeveloped attachment between the child and putative
caregiving adults. Children with reactive attachment disorder are believed to have the capacity to
form selective attachments. However, because of limited opportunities during early development,
they fail to show the behavioral manifestations of selective attachments. That is, when distressed,
they show no consistent effort to obtain comfort, support, nurturance, or protection from
caregivers. Furthermore, when distressed, children with this disorder do not respond more than
