Environmental.
minimally to comforting efforts of caregivers. Thus, the disorder is associated with the absence
of expected comfort seeking and response to comforting behaviors. As such, children with
reactive attachment disorder show diminished or absent expression of positive emotions during
routine interactions with caregivers. In addition, their emotion regulation capacity is
compromised, and they display episodes of negative emotions of fear, sadness, or irritability that
are not readily explained. A diagnosis of reactive attachment disorder should not be made in
children who are developmentally unable to form selective attachments. For this reason, the child
must have a developmental age of at least 9 months. Diagnostic assessment is enhanced by
multiple sources of input, supporting that the symptoms are apparent across contexts.
Associated Features
Because of the shared etiological association with social neglect, reactive attachment disorder
often co-occurs with developmental delays, especially in delays in cognition and language. Other
associated features include stereotypies and other signs of severe neglect (e.g., malnutrition or
signs of poor care).
297
Prevalence
The prevalence of reactive attachment disorder is unknown, but the disorder is seen relatively
rarely in clinical settings. The disorder has been found in young children exposed to severe
neglect before being placed in foster care or raised in institutions. The disorder is uncommon,
usually occurring in less than 10% of neglected children, even in cases of severe neglect.
Development and Course
Conditions of social neglect are often present in the first months of life in children diagnosed
with reactive attachment disorder, even before the disorder is diagnosed. The clinical features of
the disorder manifest in a similar fashion between the ages of 9 months and 5 years. That is,
signs of absent-to-minimal attachment behaviors and associated emotionally aberrant behaviors
are evident in children throughout this age range, although differing cognitive and motor abilities
may affect how these behaviors are expressed. Remediation and symptomatic recovery may
occur through normative caregiving environments; however, in the absence of enhanced
caregiving, the signs of the disorder may persist, at least for several years. Persistent signs of
reactive attachment disorder in early adolescence may be associated with problems in social
functioning. Less is known about the clinical presentation of reactive attachment disorder in
older children, and the diagnosis should be made with caution in children older than 5 years.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Serious social neglect is a diagnostic requirement for reactive attachment disorder
and is also the only known risk factor for the disorder. However, the majority of severely
neglected children do not develop the disorder. Prognosis for children with the disorder appears
to depend on the quality of the caregiving environment following serious neglect.
