Autism spectrum disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
There is limited information on reactive attachment behavior in young children from diverse
cultural backgrounds around the world. Cultural expectations of attachment behaviors and
caregiving practices may influence development of and concern about these patterns of behaviors
and their presentations in different settings. Caution should be exercised in making the diagnosis
of reactive attachment disorder in cultural contexts in which attachment has not been studied.
Symptoms of reactive attachment disorder may be more common in situations where attachment
figures have experienced extensive trauma, such as war-zone settings; attachment styles may also
vary among migrant and refugee children during the resettlement period. Variations in nurturing
care practices may influence risk of reactive attachment disorder.
Functional Consequences of Reactive Attachment Disorder
Reactive attachment disorder significantly impairs young children’s abilities to relate
interpersonally to adults or peers and is associated with functional impairment across many
domains of early childhood.
Differential Diagnosis
Aberrant social behaviors manifest in young children with reactive
attachment disorder, but they also are key features of autism spectrum disorder. Specifically,
young children with either condition can manifest dampened expression of positive emotions,
cognitive and language delays, and impairments in social reciprocity. As a result, reactive
attachment disorder must be differentiated from autism spectrum disorder. These
298
two disorders can be distinguished based on differential histories of neglect and on the presence
of restricted interests or ritualized behaviors, specific deficit in social communication, and
selective attachment behaviors. Children with reactive attachment disorder have experienced a
history of severe social neglect, although it is not always possible to obtain detailed histories
about the precise nature of their experiences, especially in initial evaluations. Children with
autism spectrum disorder will only rarely have a history of social neglect. The restricted interests
and repetitive behaviors characteristic of autism spectrum disorder are not a feature of reactive
attachment disorder. These clinical features manifest as excessive adherence to rituals and
routines; restricted, fixated interests; and unusual sensory reactions. However, it is important to
note that children with either condition can exhibit stereotypic behaviors such as rocking or
flapping. Children with either disorder also may exhibit a range of intellectual functioning, but
only children with autism spectrum disorder exhibit selective impairments in social
communicative behaviors, such as intentional communication (i.e., impairment in
communication that is deliberate, goal-directed, and aimed at influencing the behavior of the
recipient). Children with reactive attachment disorder show social communicative functioning
comparable to their overall level of intellectual functioning. Finally, children with autism
spectrum disorder regularly show attachment behavior typical for their developmental level. In
contrast, children with reactive attachment disorder do so only rarely or inconsistently, if at all.
Structured observations can help discriminate between the two disorders.
