Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability).
Depressive disorders.
F94.2
Developmental delays often accompany
reactive attachment disorder, but they should not be confused with the disorder. Children with
intellectual developmental disorder should exhibit social and emotional skills comparable to their
cognitive skills and do not demonstrate the profound reduction in positive affect and emotion
regulation difficulties evident in children with reactive attachment disorder. In addition,
developmentally delayed children who have reached a cognitive age of 7–9 months should
demonstrate selective attachments regardless of their chronological age. In contrast, children
with reactive attachment disorder show lack of preferred attachment despite having attained a
developmental age of at least 9 months.
Depression in young children is also associated with reductions in positive
affect. There is limited evidence, however, to suggest that children with depressive disorders
have impairments in attachment. That is, young children who have been diagnosed with
depressive disorders still should seek and respond to comforting efforts by caregivers.
Comorbidity
Conditions associated with neglect, including cognitive delays, language delays, and
stereotypies, often co-occur with reactive attachment disorder. Medical conditions, such as
severe malnutrition, may accompany signs of the disorder. Internalizing symptoms also may co-
occur with reactive attachment disorder. A relationship between reactive attachment disorder and
externalizing behavior problems or attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) has been
suggested but not clearly established.
Disinhibited Social Engagement Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A pattern of behavior in which a child actively approaches and interacts with
unfamiliar adults and exhibits at least two of the following:
1. Reduced or absent reticence in approaching and interacting with unfamiliar
adults.
2. Overly familiar verbal or physical behavior (that is not consistent with
culturally sanctioned and with age-appropriate social boundaries).
299
3. Diminished or absent checking back with adult caregiver after venturing
away, even in unfamiliar settings.
4. Willingness to go off with an unfamiliar adult with minimal or no hesitation.
B. The behaviors in Criterion A are not limited to impulsivity (as in attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder) but include socially disinhibited behavior.
C. The child has experienced a pattern of extremes of insufficient care as
