evidenced by at least one of the following:
1. Social neglect or deprivation in the form of persistent lack of having basic
emotional needs for comfort, stimulation, and affection met by caregiving
adults.
2. Repeated changes of primary caregivers that limit opportunities to form stable
attachments (e.g., frequent changes in foster care).
3. Rearing in unusual settings that severely limit opportunities to form selective
attachments (e.g., institutions with high child-to-caregiver ratios).
D. The care in Criterion C is presumed to be responsible for the disturbed behavior
in Criterion A (e.g., the disturbances in Criterion A began following the
pathogenic care in Criterion C).
E. The child has a developmental age of at least 9 months.
Specify if:
Persistent: The disorder has been present for more than 12 months.
Specify current severity:
Disinhibited social engagement disorder is specified as severe when the child
exhibits all symptoms of the disorder, with each symptom manifesting at
relatively high levels.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of disinhibited social engagement disorder is a pattern of behavior that
involves culturally inappropriate, overly familiar behavior with relative strangers (Criterion A).
This overly familiar behavior violates the social boundaries of the culture. A diagnosis of
disinhibited social engagement disorder should not be made before children are developmentally
able to form selective attachments. For this reason, the child must have a developmental age of at
least 9 months.
Associated Features
Because of the shared etiological association with social neglect, disinhibited social engagement
disorder may co-occur with developmental delays, especially cognitive and language delays,
stereotypies, and other signs of severe neglect, such as malnutrition or poor care. However, signs
of the disorder often persist even after these other signs of neglect are no longer present.
Therefore, it is not uncommon for children with the disorder to present with no current signs of
neglect. Moreover, the condition can present in children who show no signs of disordered
attachment. Thus, disinhibited social engagement disorder may be seen in children with a history
of neglect who lack attachments or whose attachments to their caregivers range from disturbed to
secure.
Prevalence
The prevalence of disinhibited social engagement disorder is unknown. Nevertheless, the
disorder appears to be rare, occurring in a minority of children, even those who have experienced
