Temperamental.
Environmental.
severe early deprivation. In low-income community populations in the United Kingdom, the
prevalence is up to 2%.
300
Development and Course
Conditions of social neglect are often present in the first months of life in children diagnosed
with disinhibited social engagement disorder, even before the disorder is diagnosed. As noted by
research among children with a history of institutional care, if neglect occurs early and signs of
the disorder appear, clinical features of the disorder are moderately stable over time, particularly
if conditions of neglect persist.
Signs of disinhibited social engagement disorder have been described from the second year
of life through adolescence among children raised in institutional settings, and even into young
adulthood. There are some differences in manifestations of the disorder from early childhood to
older ages. At the youngest ages, across many cultures, children typically show reticence when
interacting with strangers, which is nonpathological, even if they are raised in institutions and
foster care. Young children with the disorder, however, fail to show reticence to approach and
are found to engage with, and even accompany, unfamiliar adults without hesitation, as shown
by research among children with a history of institutionalized care. In preschool children raised
in institutional settings in the United Kingdom or the United States, verbal and social
intrusiveness appeared most prominent, often accompanied by attention-seeking behavior;
preschool children raised in institutional settings across several countries have displayed a
pattern of engaging in physical contact with strangers. Verbal and physical overfamiliarity
continued through middle childhood, sometimes accompanied by inauthentic expressions of
emotion. In adolescence, indiscriminate behavior may extend to peers. Relative to healthy
adolescents, adolescents with the disorder have more “superficial” peer relationships and more
peer conflicts. Adult manifestations of the disorder appear to be similar but may include
excessive self-disclosure and reduced stranger awareness.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
There is some evidence from research with international adoptees in the United
States that both blunted reward sensitivity and decreased inhibitory control are associated with
indiscriminate social behavior.
Serious social neglect is a diagnostic requirement for disinhibited social
engagement disorder. The rationale for this requirement includes research finding a strong
association between neglect and features of the disorder. Other factors also have been implicated,
such as multiple placement disruptions, borderline personality disorder in the mother, and
aberrant caregiving behaviors and low quality of care. All of these contribute to the insufficient
care criterion. Still, the majority of severely neglected children do not develop the disorder. The
disorder has not been identified in children who experience social neglect only after age 2 years.
Prognosis is only modestly associated with quality of the caregiving environment following
serious neglect. In many cases, the disorder persists, even in children whose caregiving
environment becomes markedly improved.
