Genetic and physiological.
Course modifiers.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
F43.10
Various neurobiological factors have been associated with symptoms of
the disorder, but findings concerning the nature of such factors and their specific tie to the
disorder remain preliminary.
Caregiving quality seems to moderate the course of disinhibited social
engagement disorder, at least in young children. Nevertheless, even after placement in normative
caregiving environments, some children show persistent signs of the disorder, through
adolescence and into adulthood.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
There is limited cross-cultural information on disinhibited social engagement disorder. Cultural
expectations of children’s social behaviors may affect their level of disinhibition
301
toward strangers. The absence of reticence that is characteristic of disinhibited social engagement
disorder should exceed culturally accepted norms.
Functional Consequences of Disinhibited Social Engagement Disorder
Disinhibited social engagement disorder significantly impairs young children’s abilities to relate
interpersonally to adults and peers. Both general social functioning and social competence may
be impaired, along with increased risk for peer conflicts and victimization.
Differential Diagnosis
Children with disinhibited social engagement disorder can
be distinguished from those with ADHD accompanied by social impulsivity, as the former do not
show difficulties with attention or hyperactivity.
Comorbidity
Conditions associated with neglect, including cognitive delays, language delays, and
stereotypies, may co-occur with disinhibited social engagement disorder. Autism spectrum
disorder may also co-occur. In younger children and in middle childhood, disinhibited social
engagement disorder often co-occurs with ADHD and externalizing disorders; this co-occurrence
has been proposed to relate to common impairments in cognitive inhibitory control.
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in Individuals Older Than 6 Years
Note: The following criteria apply to adults, adolescents, and children older than 6
