years. For children 6 years and younger, see corresponding criteria below.
A. Exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence in one
(or more) of the following ways:
1. Directly experiencing the traumatic event(s).
2. Witnessing, in person, the event(s) as it occurred to others.
3. Learning that the traumatic event(s) occurred to a close family member or
close friend. In cases of actual or threatened death of a family member or
friend, the event(s) must have been violent or accidental.
4. Experiencing repeated or extreme exposure to aversive details of the
traumatic event(s) (e.g., first responders collecting human remains; police
officers repeatedly exposed to details of child abuse).
Note: Criterion A4 does not apply to exposure through electronic media,
television, movies, or pictures, unless this exposure is work related.
B. Presence of one (or more) of the following intrusion symptoms associated with
the traumatic event(s), beginning after the traumatic event(s) occurred:
1. Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic
event(s).
Note: In children older than 6 years, repetitive play may occur in which
themes or aspects of the traumatic event(s) are expressed.
302
2. Recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or affect of the dream
are related to the traumatic event(s).
Note: In children, there may be frightening dreams without recognizable
content.
3. Dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which the individual feels or acts
as if the traumatic event(s) were recurring. (Such reactions may occur on a
continuum, with the most extreme expression being a complete loss of
awareness of present surroundings.)
Note: In children, trauma-specific reenactment may occur in play.
4. Intense or prolonged psychological distress at exposure to internal or external
cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event(s).
5. Marked physiological reactions to internal or external cues that symbolize or
resemble an aspect of the traumatic event(s).
C. Persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning
after the traumatic event(s) occurred, as evidenced by one or both of the
following:
1. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings
about or closely associated with the traumatic event(s).
2. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid external reminders (people, places,
