following:
1. Depersonalization: Persistent or recurrent experiences of feeling detached
from, and as if one were an outside observer of, one’s mental processes or
body (e.g., feeling as though one were in a dream; feeling a sense of unreality
of self or body or of time moving slowly).
2. Derealization: Persistent or recurrent experiences of unreality of surroundings
(e.g., the world around the individual is experienced as unreal, dreamlike,
distant, or distorted).
Note: To use this subtype, the dissociative symptoms must not be attributable to
the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., blackouts, behavior during alcohol
intoxication) or another medical condition (e.g., complex partial seizures).
Specify if:
With delayed expression: If the full diagnostic criteria are not met until at least
6 months after the event (although the onset and expression of some symptoms
may be immediate).
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in Children 6 Years and Younger
A. In children 6 years and younger, exposure to actual or threatened death, serious
injury, or sexual violence in one (or more) of the following ways:
1. Directly experiencing the traumatic event(s).
2. Witnessing, in person, the event(s) as it occurred to others, especially primary
caregivers.
3. Learning that the traumatic event(s) occurred to a parent or caregiving figure.
B. Presence of one (or more) of the following intrusion symptoms associated with
the traumatic event(s), beginning after the traumatic event(s) occurred:
1. Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic
event(s).
Note: Spontaneous and intrusive memories may not necessarily appear
distressing and may be expressed as play reenactment.
2. Recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or affect of the dream
are related to the traumatic event(s).
Note: It may not be possible to ascertain that the frightening content is
related to the traumatic event.
3. Dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which the child feels or acts as if
the traumatic event(s) were recurring. (Such reactions may occur on a
continuum, with the most extreme expression being a complete loss of
awareness of present surroundings.) Such trauma-specific reenactment may
occur in play.
4. Intense or prolonged psychological distress at exposure to internal or external
cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event(s).
