5. Marked physiological reactions to reminders of the traumatic event(s).
C. One (or more) of the following symptoms, representing either persistent
avoidance of stimuli associated with the traumatic event(s) or negative
alterations in cognitions and
304
mood associated with the traumatic event(s), must be present, beginning after
the event(s) or worsening after the event(s):
Persistent Avoidance of Stimuli
1. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid activities, places, or physical reminders that
arouse recollections of the traumatic event(s).
2. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid people, conversations, or interpersonal
situations that arouse recollections of the traumatic event(s).
Negative Alterations in Cognitions
3. Substantially increased frequency of negative emotional states (e.g., fear,
guilt, sadness, shame, confusion).
4. Markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities, including
constriction of play.
5. Socially withdrawn behavior.
6. Persistent reduction in expression of positive emotions.
D. Alterations in arousal and reactivity associated with the traumatic event(s),
beginning or worsening after the traumatic event(s) occurred, as evidenced by
two (or more) of the following:
1. Irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no provocation) typically
expressed as verbal or physical aggression toward people or objects
(including extreme temper tantrums).
2. Hypervigilance.
3. Exaggerated startle response.
4. Problems with concentration.
5. Sleep disturbance (e.g., difficulty falling or staying asleep or restless sleep).
E. The duration of the disturbance is more than 1 month.
F. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in
relationships with parents, siblings, peers, or other caregivers or with school
behavior.
G. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., medication or alcohol) or another medical condition.
Specify whether:
With dissociative symptoms: The individual’s symptoms meet the criteria for
posttraumatic stress disorder, and the individual experiences persistent or
recurrent symptoms of either of the following:
