1. Depersonalization: Persistent or recurrent experiences of feeling detached
from, and as if one were an outside observer of, one’s mental processes or
body (e.g., feeling as though one were in a dream; feeling a sense of unreality
of self or body or of time moving slowly).
2. Derealization: Persistent or recurrent experiences of unreality of surroundings
(e.g., the world around the individual is experienced as unreal, dreamlike,
distant, or distorted).
Note: To use this subtype, the dissociative symptoms must not be attributable to
the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., blackouts) or another medical
condition (e.g., complex partial seizures).
Specify if:
With delayed expression: If the full diagnostic criteria are not met until at least
6 months after the event (although the onset and expression of some symptoms
may be immediate).
305
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is the development of characteristic
symptoms following exposure to one or more traumatic events. The clinical presentation of
PTSD varies. In some individuals, fear-based reexperiencing, emotional, and behavioral
symptoms may predominate. In others, anhedonic or dysphoric mood states and negative
cognitions may be most prominent. In some other individuals, arousal and reactive-externalizing
symptoms are prominent, while in yet others, dissociative symptoms predominate. Finally, some
individuals exhibit combinations of these symptom patterns.
The following discussion of specific criteria for PTSD refers to specific criteria for adults;
criteria for children 6 years or younger may differ in criterion numbering given differences in
applicable criteria for this age group.
The traumatic events in Criterion A all involve actual or threatened death, serious injury, or
sexual violence in some way but differ in how the individual is exposed to them, which can be
through directly experiencing the traumatic event (Criterion A1), witnessing in person the event
as it occurred to others (Criterion A2), learning that the event occurred to a family member or a
close friend (Criterion A3), or indirect exposure in the course of occupational duties, through
being exposed to grotesque details of an event (Criterion A4). The disorder may be especially
severe or long-lasting when the stressor is interpersonal and intentional (e.g., torture, sexual
violence).
The directly experienced traumatic events in Criterion A include, but are not limited to,
exposure to war as a combatant or civilian, actual or threatened physical assault in which the
threat is perceived as imminent and realistic (e.g., physical attack, robbery, mugging, childhood
physical abuse), being kidnapped, being taken hostage, terrorist attack, torture, incarceration as a
prisoner of war, natural or human-made disasters, and severe motor vehicle accidents.
Sexual trauma includes, but is not limited to, actual or threatened sexual violence or coercion
