(e.g., forced sexual penetration; alcohol/drug-facilitated nonconsensual sexual penetration; other
unwanted sexual contact; and other unwanted sexual experiences not involving contact, such as
being forced to watch pornography, exposure to the display of genitals by an exhibitionist, or
being the victim of unwanted photography or videotaping of a sexual nature or the unwanted
dissemination of these photographs or videos).
Being bullied may qualify as a Criterion A1 experience when there is a credible threat of
serious harm or sexual violence. For children, sexually violent events may include
developmentally inappropriate sexual experiences without physical violence or injury.
A life-threatening illness or debilitating medical condition is not necessarily considered a
traumatic event. Qualifying events of this type include life-threatening medical emergencies
(e.g., an acute myocardial infarction, anaphylactic shock) or a particular event in treatment that
evokes catastrophic feelings of terror, pain, helplessness, or imminent death (e.g., waking during
surgery, debridement of severe burn wounds, emergency cardioversion).
Witnessed events (Criterion A2) include, but are not limited to, observing threatened or
serious injury, unnatural death, physical or sexual abuse of another person due to violent assault,
domestic violence, accident, war, or disaster. For example, this would include parents witnessing
their child in an acute life-endangering incident (e.g., a diving accident) or a medical catastrophe
during the course of their child’s illness or ongoing treatment (e.g., a life-threatening
hemorrhage).
Indirect exposure through learning about an event (Criterion A3) is limited to events
affecting close relatives or friends that were violent or accidental (i.e., death from natural causes
does not qualify). Such events include murder, violent personal assault, combat, terrorist attack,
sexual violence, suicide, and serious accident or injury.
The indirect exposure of professionals to the grotesque effects of war, rape, genocide, or
abusive violence inflicted on others occurring in the context of their work duties can also result
in PTSD and thus is considered to be a qualifying trauma (Criterion A4). Examples
306
include first responders exposed to serious injury or death and military personnel collecting
human remains. Indirect exposure can also occur through photos, videos, verbal accounts, or
written accounts (e.g., police officers reviewing crime reports or conducting interviews with
crime victims, drone operators, members of the news media covering traumatic events, and
psychotherapists exposed to details of their patients’ traumatic experiences).
Exposure to multiple traumatic events is common and can take many forms. Some
individuals experience different types of traumatic events at different times (e.g., sexual violence
during childhood and natural disaster as adults). Others experience the same type of traumatic
event at different times or in a series committed by the same person/people over an extended
period (e.g., child sexual or physical assault; physical or sexual assault by an intimate partner).
Others may experience numerous traumatic events that are the same or different during an
extended hazardous period such as deployment or living in a conflict zone. When one is
assessing the PTSD criteria in individuals who have experienced multiple traumatic events
across their lives, it may be useful to determine if there is a specific, discrete example that the
individual considers to be the worst given that the symptomatic expressions of PTSD Criterion B
and Criterion C specifically refer to the traumatic event (e.g., recurrent, involuntary, and
