intrusive distressing recollections of the traumatic event). However, if it is difficult for the
individual to identify a worst example, it is appropriate to consider the entire exposure as
meeting Criterion A. In addition, some discrete events may incorporate several traumatic event
types (e.g., an individual involved in a mass casualty incident sustains a major injury, witnesses
someone else being injured, and then learns that a family member was killed in the incident).
The traumatic event can be reexperienced in various ways. Commonly, the individual has
recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive recollections of the event (Criterion B1). Intrusive
recollections in PTSD are distinguished from depressive rumination in that they apply only to
involuntary and intrusive distressing memories. The emphasis is on recurrent memories of the
event that usually include intrusive, vivid, sensory, and emotional components that are
distressing and not merely ruminative. A common reexperiencing symptom is distressing dreams
that replay the event itself or that are representative or thematically related to the major threats
involved in the traumatic event (Criterion B2). The individual may experience dissociative states
that typically last a few seconds and rarely are of a longer duration, during which components of
the event are relived and the individual behaves as if the event were occurring at that moment
(Criterion B3). Such events occur on a continuum, ranging from brief visual or other sensory
intrusions about part of the traumatic event without loss of reality orientation to a partial loss of
awareness of present surroundings to a complete loss of awareness. These episodes, often
referred to as “flashbacks,” are typically brief but can be associated with prolonged distress and
heightened arousal. For young children, reenactment of events related to trauma may be
expressed behaviorally in play or in dissociative states. Intense psychological distress (Criterion
B4) or physiological reactivity (Criterion B5) often occurs when the individual is exposed to
triggering events or somatic reactions that resemble or symbolize an aspect of the traumatic
event (e.g., windy days after a hurricane, seeing someone who resembles one’s perpetrator). The
triggering cue could also be a physical sensation (e.g., dizziness for survivors of head trauma,
rapid heartbeat for a previously traumatized child), particularly for individuals with highly
somatic presentations.
Stimuli associated with the trauma are persistently avoided. The individual commonly makes
deliberate efforts to avoid thoughts, memories, or feelings (e.g., by utilizing distraction or
suppression techniques, including substance use, to avoid internal reminders) (Criterion C1), and
to avoid activities, conversations, objects, situations, or people who arouse recollections of it
(Criterion C2).
Negative alterations in cognitions or mood associated with the traumatic event begin or
worsen after exposure to the event. These negative alterations can take various forms, including
an inability to remember key and emotionally painful aspects of the traumatic
307
event. Such memory loss is typically attributable to dissociative amnesia and is not
attributable to head injury or impaired encoding of the memory due to drug or alcohol use
(Criterion D1). Individuals with PTSD often report that the traumatic event has irrevocably
altered their lives and their view of the world. This is characterized by persistent and exaggerated
negative beliefs and expectations regarding important aspects of life applied to themselves,
others, the world, or the future (Criterion D2) (e.g., “Bad things will always happen to me”; “The
world is dangerous, and I can never be adequately protected”; “I can’t trust anyone ever again”;
