“My life is permanently ruined”; “I have lost any chance for future happiness”; “My life will be
cut short”). Individuals with PTSD may have persistent erroneous cognitions about the causes of
the traumatic event that lead them to blame themselves or others (e.g., “It’s all my fault that my
uncle abused me”) (Criterion D3). A persistent negative mood state (e.g., fear, dysphoria, horror,
anger, guilt, shame) either began or worsened after exposure to the event (Criterion D4). The
individual may experience markedly diminished interest or participation in previously enjoyed
activities (Criterion D5), may feel detached or estranged from other people (Criterion D6), or
may experience a persistent inability to feel positive emotions (especially happiness, joy,
satisfaction, or emotions associated with intimacy, tenderness, and sexuality) (Criterion D7).
Negative alterations in arousal and reactivity also begin or get worse after exposure to the
event. Individuals with PTSD may exhibit irritable or angry behavior and may engage in
aggressive verbal or physical behavior with little or no provocation (e.g., yelling at people,
getting into fights, destroying objects) (Criterion E1). They may also engage voluntarily in
reckless or self-destructive behavior that is dangerous, that shows a disregard for the physical
safety of themselves or others, and that could directly result in serious physical harm or death
(Criterion E2). Examples include, but are not limited to, dangerous driving (e.g., drunk driving,
driving at dangerously high speeds), excessive alcohol or drug use, having risky sex (e.g.,
unprotected sex with a partner whose HIV status is unknown, high number of sexual partners), or
self-directed violence including suicidal behaviors. Criterion E2 does not include circumstances
in which individuals must engage in dangerous situations as a part of their job (e.g., armed forces
members in combat situations or first responders in emergency situations) and take reasonable
safety precautions to reduce their risk or when individuals engage in behaviors that may be
unwise, unhealthy, or financially harmful but pose no direct risk of immediate serious physical
harm or death (e.g., pathological gambling, poor financial decisions, binge eating, unhealthy
lifestyles). PTSD is often characterized by a heightened vigilance for potential threats, including
those that are related to the traumatic experience (e.g., following a motor vehicle accident, being
especially sensitive to the threat potentially caused by cars or trucks) and those not related to the
traumatic event (e.g., being fearful of suffering a heart attack) (Criterion E3). Individuals with
PTSD may be very reactive to unexpected stimuli, displaying a heightened startle response, or
jumpiness, to loud noises or unexpected movements (e.g., jumping markedly in response to a
telephone ringing) (Criterion E4). Startle responses are involuntary and reflexive (automatic,
instantaneous), and stimuli that evoke exaggerated startle responses (Criterion E4) need not be
related at all to the traumatic event. Startle responses are distinguished from the cued
physiological arousal responses in Criterion B5, for which there needs to be at least some level
of conscious appraisal that the stimulus producing physiological responses is related to the
trauma. Concentration difficulties, including difficulty remembering daily events (e.g., forgetting
one’s telephone number) or attending to focused tasks (e.g., following a conversation for a
sustained period of time), are commonly reported (Criterion E5). Problems with sleep onset and
maintenance are common and may be associated with nightmares and safety concerns or with
generalized elevated arousal that interferes with adequate sleep (Criterion E6).
The diagnosis of PTSD requires that the duration of the symptoms in Criteria B, C, D, and E
be more than 1 month (Criterion F). For a current diagnosis of PTSD, Criteria B, C, D, and E
must all be met for more than 1 month, for at least the past month. For a lifetime
308
