diagnosis of PTSD, there must be a period of time lasting more than 1 month during which
Criteria B, C, D, and E have all been met for the same 1-month period of time.
A significant subgroup of individuals with PTSD experience persistent dissociative
symptoms of either depersonalization (detachment from their bodies) or derealization
(detachment from the world around them). This can be indicated by using the “with dissociative
symptoms” specifier.
Associated Features
Developmental regression, such as loss of language in young children, may occur. Auditory
pseudo-hallucinations, such as having the sensory experience of hearing one’s thoughts spoken
in one or more different voices, as well as paranoid ideation, can be present. Following
prolonged, repeated, and severe traumatic events (e.g., childhood abuse, torture), the individual
may additionally experience difficulties in regulating emotions or maintaining stable
interpersonal relationships, or dissociative symptoms. When the traumatic event involves the
violent death of someone with whom the individual had a close relationship, symptoms of both
prolonged grief disorder and PTSD may be present.
Prevalence
The national lifetime prevalence estimate for PTSD using DSM-IV criteria is 6.8% for U.S.
adults. Lifetime prevalence for U.S. adolescents using DSM-IV criteria has ranged from 5.0% to
8.1% and a past 6-month prevalence of 4.9% for adolescents. While definitive, comprehensive
population-based data using DSM-5 are not available, findings are beginning to emerge. In two
U.S. national epidemiological studies, lifetime DSM-5 PTSD prevalence estimates ranged from
6.1% to 8.3%, and the national 12-month DSM-5 prevalence estimate was 4.7% in both studies.
National lifetime DSM-IV PTSD estimates from World Mental Health Surveys in 24 countries
varied substantially among countries, income country groups, and WHO regions but was 3.9%
overall. In conflict-affected populations worldwide, the point prevalence of PTSD with
functional impairment is 11% after adjustment for age differences across studies.
Rates of PTSD are higher among veterans and others whose vocation increases the risk of
traumatic exposure (e.g., police, firefighters, emergency medical personnel). Highest rates
(ranging from one-third to more than one-half of those exposed) are found among survivors of
rape, military combat and captivity, and ethnically or politically motivated internment and
genocide. The prevalence of PTSD may vary across development; children and adolescents,
including preschool children, generally have displayed lower prevalence following exposure to
serious traumatic events; however, this may be because previous criteria were insufficiently
developmentally informed. Racial differences, based on DSM-IV data, show higher rates of
PTSD among U.S. Latinx, African Americans, and American Indians compared with Whites.
Potential reasons for these prevalence variations include differences in predisposing or enabling
factors, such as exposure to past adversity and racism and discrimination, and in availability or
quality of treatment, social support, socioeconomic status, and other social resources that
facilitate recovery and are confounded with ethnic and racialized background.
Development and Course
