PTSD can occur at any age, beginning after the first year of life. Symptoms usually begin within
the first 3 months after the trauma, although there may be a delay of months, or even years,
before full criteria for the diagnosis are met. There is abundant evidence for what DSM-IV called
“delayed onset” but is now called “delayed expression,” with the recognition that some
symptoms typically appear immediately and that the delay is in meeting full criteria.
Frequently, an individual’s reaction to a trauma initially meets criteria for acute stress
disorder in the immediate aftermath of the trauma. The symptoms of PTSD and the
309
relative predominance of different symptoms may vary over time. Duration of the symptoms
also varies, with complete recovery within 3 months occurring in approximately one-half of
adults, while some individuals remain symptomatic for longer than 12 months and sometimes for
more than 50 years. Symptom recurrence and intensification may occur in response to reminders
of the original trauma, ongoing life stressors, or newly experienced traumatic events.
The clinical expression of reexperiencing can vary across development. Developmental
variations in clinical expression inform the use of different criteria in children 6 years and
younger and in individuals who are older. Young children may report new onset of frightening
dreams without content specific to the traumatic event. Children age 6 and younger may develop
PTSD as a result of severe emotional abuse (e.g., threat of abandonment), which can be
perceived as life-threatening. During treatment for life-threatening illness (e.g., cancer, solid
organ transplantation), the experience of young children of the severity and intensity of the
treatment may contribute to risk of developing posttraumatic stress symptoms; the self-appraisal
of threat may also contribute to the risk of developing posttraumatic stress symptoms in
adolescents. Before age 6 years, young children are more likely to express reexperiencing
symptoms through play that refers directly or symbolically to the trauma (see PTSD criteria for
children 6 years and younger). They may not manifest fearful reactions at the time of the
exposure or during reexperiencing. Parents may report a wide range of emotional or behavioral
changes in young children. Children may focus on imagined interventions in their play or
storytelling. In addition to avoidance, children may become preoccupied with reminders.
Because of young children’s limitations in expressing thoughts or labeling emotions, negative
alterations in mood or cognition tend to involve primarily mood changes. Children may
experience co-occurring traumas (e.g., physical abuse, witnessing domestic violence) and in
chronic circumstances may not be able to identify onset of symptomatology. Avoidant behavior
may be associated with restricted play or exploratory behavior in young children; reduced
participation in new activities in school-age children; or reluctance to pursue developmental
opportunities in adolescents (e.g., dating, driving). Older children and adolescents may judge
themselves as cowardly. Adolescents may harbor beliefs of being changed in ways that make
them socially undesirable and estrange them from peers and lose aspirations for the future.
Irritable or aggressive behavior in children and adolescents can interfere with peer relationships
and school behavior. Reckless behavior may lead to accidental injury to self or others, thrill-
seeking, or high-risk behaviors. In older individuals, the disorder is associated with negative
health perceptions, primary care utilization, and suicidal thoughts. In addition, declining health,
worsening cognitive functioning, and social isolation may exacerbate PTSD symptoms.
