Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Environmental.
Temperamental.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Risk factors for PTSD can operate in many ways, including predisposing individuals to trauma
or to extreme emotional responses when exposed to traumatic events. Risk (and protective)
factors are generally divided into pretraumatic, peritraumatic, and posttraumatic factors.
Pretraumatic Factors
High-risk factors include childhood emotional problems by age 6 years (e.g.,
externalizing or anxiety problems) and prior mental disorders (e.g., panic disorder, depressive
disorder, PTSD, or obsessive-compulsive disorder [OCD]). Individual differences in premorbid
personality may influence the trajectory of response to trauma and treatment outcomes.
Personality traits associated with negative emotional responses such as depressed mood and
anxiousness represent risk factors for the development of PTSD. Such traits might be captured in
measures of negative affectivity (neuroticism) on
310
standardized personality scales. Premorbid trait impulsivity tends to be associated with
externalizing manifestations of PTSD and comorbidities of the externalizing spectrum, including
substance use disorder or aggressive behavior.
As documented among U.S. civilians and veterans, these risk factors include
lower socioeconomic status; lower education; exposure to prior trauma (especially during
childhood); childhood adversity (e.g., economic deprivation, family dysfunction, parental
separation or death); lower intelligence; ethnic discrimination and racism; and a family
psychiatric history. Social support prior to event exposure is protective.
The risk of developing PTSD following traumatic exposure has been
demonstrated to be modestly heritable in twin studies and molecular studies. Genome-wide
association data from a large multiethnic cohort support the heritability of PTSD and
demonstrate three robust genome-wide significant loci that vary by geographic ancestry.
Susceptibility to PTSD may also be influenced by epigenetic factors. Genome-wide association
data from U.S. veterans identify eight significant regions in Americans of European descent
associated with intrusive reexperiencing symptoms of PTSD; data from the United Kingdom also
support these associations.
Peritraumatic Factors
These include severity (dose) of the trauma, perceived life threat, personal injury,
interpersonal violence (particularly trauma perpetrated by a caregiver or involving a witnessed
threat to a caregiver in children), and, for military personnel, being a perpetrator, witnessing
atrocities, or killing the enemy. Finally, dissociation, fear, panic, and other peritraumatic
responses that occur during the trauma and persist afterward are risk factors.
Posttraumatic Factors
These include negative appraisals, inappropriate coping strategies, and
development of acute stress disorder.
