Environmental. These include subsequent exposure to repeated upsetting reminders, subsequent
adverse life events, and financial or other trauma-related losses. Posttraumatic experiences such
as forced migration and high levels of daily stressors may contribute to different conditional risks
of PTSD across cultural contexts. Exposure to racial and ethnic discrimination has been
associated with a more chronic course among African American and Latinx adults. Social
support (including family stability, for children) is a protective factor that moderates outcome
after trauma.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Different demographic, cultural, and occupational groups have different levels of exposure to
traumatic events, and the relative risk of developing PTSD following a similar level of exposure
(e.g., religious persecution) may also vary across cultural, ethnic, and racialized groups.
Variation in the type of traumatic exposure (e.g., genocide), the impact on disorder severity of
the meaning attributed to the traumatic event (e.g., inability to perform funerary rites after a mass
killing), the ongoing sociocultural context (e.g., residing among unpunished perpetrators in
postconflict settings), exposure to racial and ethnic discrimination, and other cultural factors
(e.g., acculturative stress in migrants) may influence the risk of onset and severity of PTSD
across cultural groups. Some communities are exposed to pervasive and ongoing traumatic
environments, rather than isolated Criterion A events; in these communities, the predictive power
of individual traumatic events for the development of PTSD may diminish. In cultures where
social image (e.g., maintaining a family’s “face”) is emphasized, public defamation or shaming
may magnify the impact of Criterion A events. Some cultures may attribute PTSD syndromes to
negative supernatural experiences.
311
The clinical expression of the symptoms or symptom clusters of PTSD can vary culturally in
both adults and children. In many non-Western groups, avoidance is less commonly observed,
whereas somatic symptoms (e.g., dizziness, shortness of breath, heat sensations) are more
common; other symptoms that vary cross-culturally are distressing dreams, amnesia not related
to head injury, and reckless but nonsuicidal behavior. Negative moods, especially anger, are
common cross-culturally in individuals with PTSD, as are distressing dreams and sleep paralysis.
Across cultures, somatic symptoms are frequent, occurring in both children and adults, especially
after sexual trauma. Symptoms that vary cross-culturally in relation to PTSD among children
include intrusive thoughts, diminished participation in activities, inability to experience positive
emotions, irritability, aggression, and hypervigilance. Distressing dreams, flashbacks,
psychological distress upon exposure to trauma cues, and efforts to avoid memories and thoughts
are common in children with PTSD across cultures.
In certain cultural contexts, it may be normative to respond to traumatic events with negative
beliefs about oneself or with spiritual attributions that may appear exaggerated to others. For
example, blaming oneself may be consistent with ideas of karma in South and East Asia, destiny
or “spoiled medicine law” in West Africa, and cultural differences in locus of control and
conceptions of self.
In many populations around the world, there are cultural concepts of distress that resemble
