Adjustment disorders.
PTSD and are characterized by diverse manifestations of psychological distress attributed to
frightening or traumatic experiences. Thus, cultural concepts of distress influence the expression
of PTSD and the range of its comorbid disorders (see “Culture and Psychiatric Diagnosis” in
Section III).
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
PTSD is more prevalent among women than among men across the life span. Lifetime
prevalence of PTSD ranges from 8.0% to 11.0% for women and 4.1% to 5.4% for men based on
two large U.S. population-based studies using DSM-5 criteria. Some of the increased risk for
PTSD in women appears to be attributable to a greater likelihood of exposure to childhood
sexual abuse, sexual assault, and other forms of interpersonal violence, which carry the highest
risk for development of PTSD. Women in the general population also experience PTSD for a
longer duration than do men. However, other factors likely contributing to the higher prevalence
in women include gender differences in the emotional and cognitive processing of trauma, as
well as effects of reproductive hormones. When responses of men and women to specific
stressors are compared, gender differences in risk for PTSD persist. On the other hand, PTSD
symptom profiles and factor structures are similar between men and women.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Traumatic events such as childhood abuse or sexual trauma increase an individual’s suicide risk
in both civilians and veterans. PTSD is associated with suicidal thoughts, suicide attempts, and
death from suicide. The presence of PTSD has been associated with an increased likelihood of
transitioning from suicidal thoughts to a suicide plan or attempt, and this effect of PTSD occurs
independently of the increased risk of mood disorders on the likelihood of suicidal behaviors.
Among adolescents there is also a significant relationship between PTSD and suicidal thoughts
or behavior even after adjustment for the effects of comorbidity.
Functional Consequences of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
PTSD is associated with high impairment in social, occupational, and physical functioning;
reduced quality of life; and physical health problems. Impaired functioning is exhibited
312
across social, interpersonal, developmental, educational, physical health, and occupational
domains. In community and veteran samples, PTSD is associated with poor social and family
relationships, absenteeism from work, lower income, and lower educational and occupational
success.
Differential Diagnosis
In adjustment disorders, the stressor can be of any severity or type rather
than a stressor involving exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence
as required by PTSD Criterion A. The diagnosis of an adjustment disorder is used when the
response to a stressor that meets PTSD Criterion A does not meet all other PTSD criteria (or
