Other posttraumatic disorders and conditions.
Acute stress disorder.
Anxiety disorders and obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Major depressive disorder.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Personality disorders.
Dissociative disorders.
criteria for another mental disorder). An adjustment disorder is also diagnosed when the
symptom pattern of PTSD occurs in response to a stressor that does not meet PTSD Criterion A
(e.g., spouse leaving, being fired).
Not all psychopathology that occurs in individuals
exposed to an extreme stressor should necessarily be attributed to PTSD. The PTSD diagnosis
requires that trauma exposure precede the onset or exacerbation of pertinent symptoms. If the
symptom response pattern to the extreme stressor meets criteria for another mental disorder,
these diagnoses should be given instead of, or in addition to, PTSD. Other diagnoses and
conditions are excluded if they are better explained by PTSD (e.g., symptoms of panic disorder
that occur only after exposure to traumatic reminders). If severe, symptom response patterns to
the extreme stressor that meet criteria for another mental disorder may warrant a separate
diagnosis (e.g., dissociative amnesia) in addition to PTSD.
Acute stress disorder is distinguished from PTSD because the symptom
pattern in acute stress disorder is restricted to a duration of 3 days to 1 month following exposure
to the traumatic event.
In OCD, there are recurrent intrusive thoughts,
but these meet the definition of an obsession. In addition, the intrusive thoughts are not related to
an experienced traumatic event, compulsions are usually present, and other symptoms of PTSD
or acute stress disorder are typically absent. Neither the arousal and dissociative symptoms of
panic disorder nor the avoidance, irritability, and anxiety of generalized anxiety disorder are
associated with a specific traumatic event. The symptoms of separation anxiety disorder are
clearly related to separation from home or family, rather than to a traumatic event.
Major depression may or may not be preceded by a traumatic event and
should be diagnosed if full criteria have been met. Specifically, major depressive disorder does
not include any PTSD Criterion B or C symptoms. Nor does it include a number of symptoms
from PTSD Criterion D or E. However, if full criteria for PTSD are also met, both diagnoses
may be given.
Both ADHD and PTSD may include problems in attention,
concentration, and learning. In contrast to ADHD, where the problems in attention,
concentration, and learning must have their onset prior to age 12, in PTSD the symptoms have
their onset following exposure to a Criterion A traumatic event. In PTSD, disruptions in the
individual’s attention and concentration can be attributable to alertness to danger and
exaggerated startle responses to reminders of the trauma.
Interpersonal difficulties that had their onset, or were greatly exacerbated,
after exposure to a traumatic event may be an indication of PTSD, rather than a personality
disorder, in which such difficulties would be expected independently of any traumatic exposure.
313
Dissociative 
amnesia, 
dissociative 
identity 
disorder, 
and
depersonalization-derealization disorder may or may not be preceded by exposure to a traumatic
event or may or may not have co-occurring PTSD symptoms. When full PTSD criteria are also
met, however, the PTSD “with dissociative symptoms” subtype should be considered.
