Functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder).
Psychotic disorders.
Traumatic brain injury.
F43.0
New onset of somatic symptoms
within the context of posttraumatic distress might be an indication of PTSD rather than
functional neurological symptom disorder.
Flashbacks in PTSD must be distinguished from illusions, hallucinations,
and other perceptual disturbances that may occur in schizophrenia, brief psychotic disorder, and
other psychotic disorders; depressive and bipolar disorders with psychotic features; delirium;
substance/medication-induced disorders; and psychotic disorders due to another medical
condition. PTSD flashbacks are distinguished from these other perceptual disturbances by being
directly related to the traumatic experience and by occurring in the absence of other psychotic or
substance-induced features.
Some types of traumatic events increase risk of both PTSD and traumatic
brain injury (TBI) because they can produce head injuries (e.g., military combat, bomb blasts,
child physical abuse, intimate partner violence, violent crime, motor vehicle or other accidents).
In such cases, individuals presenting with PTSD may also have TBI, and those presenting with
TBI may also have PTSD. Individuals with PTSD who also have TBI may have persistent
postconcussive symptoms (e.g., headaches, dizziness, sensitivity to light or sound, irritability,
concentration deficits). However, such symptoms may also occur in non-brain-injured
populations, including individuals with PTSD. Because symptoms of PTSD and TBI-related
neurocognitive symptoms can overlap, a differential diagnosis between PTSD and
neurocognitive disorder symptoms attributable to TBI may be possible based on the presence of
symptoms that are distinctive to each presentation. Whereas reexperiencing and avoidance are
characteristic of PTSD and not the effects of TBI, persistent disorientation and confusion are
more specific to TBI (neurocognitive effects) than to PTSD. TBI-related memory problems
concerning the traumatic event are typically attributable to injury-related inability to encode the
information, whereas PTSD-related memory problems typically reflect dissociative amnesia.
Sleep difficulties are common to both disorders.
Comorbidity
Individuals with PTSD are more likely than those without PTSD to have symptoms that meet
diagnostic criteria for at least one other mental disorder, such as depressive, bipolar, anxiety, or
substance use disorders. PTSD is also associated with increased risk of major neurocognitive
disorder. In a U.S.-based study, women were more likely to develop PTSD following a mild TBI.
Although most young children with PTSD also have at least one other diagnosis, the patterns of
comorbidity are different than in adults, with oppositional defiant disorder and separation anxiety
disorder predominating.
Acute Stress Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence in one
(or more) of the following ways:
