1. Directly experiencing the traumatic event(s).
2. Witnessing, in person, the event(s) as it occurred to others.
314
3. Learning that the event(s) occurred to a close family member or close friend.
Note: In cases of actual or threatened death of a family member or friend, the
event(s) must have been violent or accidental.
4. Experiencing repeated or extreme exposure to aversive details of the
traumatic event(s) (e.g., first responders collecting human remains, police
officers repeatedly exposed to details of child abuse).
Note: This does not apply to exposure through electronic media, television,
movies, or pictures, unless this exposure is work related.
B. Presence of nine (or more) of the following symptoms from any of the five
categories of intrusion, negative mood, dissociation, avoidance, and arousal,
beginning or worsening after the traumatic event(s) occurred:
Intrusion Symptoms
1. Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic
event(s). Note: In children, repetitive play may occur in which themes or
aspects of the traumatic event(s) are expressed.
2. Recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or affect of the dream
are related to the event(s). Note: In children, there may be frightening dreams
without recognizable content.
3. Dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which the individual feels or acts
as if the traumatic event(s) were recurring. (Such reactions may occur on a
continuum, with the most extreme expression being a complete loss of
awareness of present surroundings.) Note: In children, trauma-specific
reenactment may occur in play.
4. Intense or prolonged psychological distress or marked physiological reactions
in response to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect
of the traumatic event(s).
Negative Mood
5. Persistent inability to experience positive emotions (e.g., inability to
experience happiness, satisfaction, or loving feelings).
Dissociative Symptoms
6. An altered sense of the reality of one’s surroundings or oneself (e.g., seeing
oneself from another’s perspective, being in a daze, time slowing).
7. Inability to remember an important aspect of the traumatic event(s) (typically
due to dissociative amnesia and not to other factors such as head injury,
alcohol, or drugs).
Avoidance Symptoms
