8. Efforts to avoid distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings about or closely
associated with the traumatic event(s).
9. Efforts to avoid external reminders (people, places, conversations, activities,
objects, situations) that arouse distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings
about or closely associated with the traumatic event(s).
Arousal Symptoms
10. Sleep disturbance (e.g., difficulty falling or staying asleep, restless sleep).
11. Irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no provocation), typically
expressed as verbal or physical aggression toward people or objects.
12. Hypervigilance.
13. Problems with concentration.
14. Exaggerated startle response.
315
C. Duration of the disturbance (symptoms in Criterion B) is 3 days to 1 month after
trauma exposure.
Note: Symptoms typically begin immediately after the trauma, but persistence
for at least 3 days and up to a month is needed to meet disorder criteria.
D. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
E. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., medication or alcohol) or another medical condition (e.g., mild traumatic
brain injury) and is not better explained by brief psychotic disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of acute stress disorder is the development of characteristic symptoms
lasting from 3 days to 1 month following exposure to one or more traumatic events (Criterion A),
which are the same type as described in PTSD Criterion A (for more information, see
“Diagnostic Features” for PTSD).
The clinical presentation of acute stress disorder may vary by individual but typically
involves an anxiety response that includes some form of reexperiencing of or reactivity to the
traumatic event. Presentations may include intrusion symptoms, negative mood, dissociative
symptoms, avoidance symptoms, and arousal symptoms (Criterion B1–B14). In some
individuals, a dissociative or detached presentation can predominate, although these individuals
typically will also display strong emotional or physiological reactivity in response to trauma
reminders. In other individuals, there can be a strong anger response in which reactivity is
characterized by irritable or possibly aggressive responses.
Intrusion symptoms (Criterion B1–B4) are the same as described in PTSD Criterion B1–B5
(for discussion of these symptoms, see “Diagnostic Features” for PTSD; note that acute stress
disorder Criterion B4 comprises PTSD Criterion B4 and B5). Individuals with acute stress
disorder may have a persistent inability to feel positive emotions (e.g., happiness, joy,
