satisfaction, or emotions associated with intimacy, tenderness, sexuality) but can experience
negative emotions such as fear, sadness, anger, guilt, or shame (Criterion B5). Alterations in
awareness can include depersonalization, a detached sense of oneself (e.g., seeing oneself from
the other side of the room), or derealization, having a distorted view of one’s surroundings (e.g.,
perceiving that things are moving in slow motion, seeing things in a daze, not being aware of
events that one would normally encode) (Criterion B6). Some individuals also report an inability
to remember an important aspect of the traumatic event that was presumably encoded. This
symptom is attributable to dissociative amnesia and is not attributable to head injury, alcohol, or
drugs (Criterion B7). Stimuli associated with the trauma are persistently avoided. The individual
commonly makes deliberate efforts to avoid thoughts, memories, or feelings (e.g., by using
distraction or suppression techniques, including substance use, to avoid internal reminders)
(Criterion B8), and to avoid activities, conversations, objects, situations, or people who arouse
recollections of it (Criterion B9).
It is very common for individuals with acute stress disorder to experience problems with
sleep onset and maintenance, which may be associated with nightmares and safety concerns or
with generalized elevated arousal that interferes with adequate sleep (Criterion B10). Individuals
with acute stress disorder may exhibit irritable behavior and may even engage in aggressive
verbal or physical behavior with little or no provocation (e.g., yelling at people, getting into
fights, destroying objects) (Criterion B11). Acute stress disorder is often characterized by a
heightened vigilance for potential threats, including those that are related to the traumatic
experience (e.g., following a motor vehicle accident, being especially sensitive to the threat
potentially caused by cars or trucks) and those not related to the traumatic event (e.g., being
fearful of suffering a heart attack) (Criterion B12). Concentration difficulties (Criterion B13)
include difficulty remembering familiar facts (e.g.,
316
forgetting one’s telephone number) or daily events (e.g., having recently read part of a book
or newspaper) or attending to focused tasks (e.g., following a conversation for a sustained period
of time).
Individuals with acute stress disorder may be very reactive to unexpected stimuli, displaying
a heightened startle response or jumpiness to loud noises (e.g., in response to a telephone
ringing) or unexpected movements (Criterion B14). Startle responses are involuntary and
reflexive (automatic, instantaneous), and stimuli that evoke exaggerated startle responses
(Criterion B14) need not be related to the traumatic event.
The full symptom picture must last for at least 3 days after the traumatic event but should not
last longer than 1 month (Criterion C). Symptoms that occur immediately after the event but
resolve in less than 3 days would not meet criteria for acute stress disorder.
Associated Features
Individuals with acute stress disorder commonly engage in catastrophic or extremely negative
thoughts about their role in the traumatic event, their response to the traumatic experience, or the
likelihood of future harm. For example, an individual with acute stress disorder may feel
excessively guilty about not having prevented the traumatic event or about not adapting to the
