experience more successfully. Individuals with acute stress disorder may also interpret their
symptoms in a catastrophic manner, such that flashback memories or emotional numbing may be
interpreted as a sign of diminished mental capacity. It is common for individuals with acute
stress disorder to experience panic attacks in the initial month after trauma exposure that may be
triggered by trauma reminders or may apparently occur spontaneously. Additionally, individuals
with acute stress disorder may display chaotic or impulsive behavior. For example, individuals
may drive recklessly, make irrational decisions, or gamble excessively. In children, there may be
significant separation anxiety, possibly manifested by excessive needs for attention from
caregivers. In the case of bereavement following a death that occurred in traumatic
circumstances, the symptoms of acute stress disorder can involve acute grief reactions. In such
cases, reexperiencing, dissociative, and arousal symptoms may involve reactions to the loss, such
as intrusive memories of the circumstances of the individual’s death, disbelief that the individual
has died, and anger about the death. Postconcussive symptoms (e.g., headaches, dizziness,
sensitivity to light or sound, irritability, concentration deficits), which occur frequently following
mild traumatic brain injury (TBI), are also frequently seen in individuals with acute stress
disorder. Postconcussive symptoms are equally common in brain-injured and non-brain-injured
populations, and the frequent occurrence of postconcussive symptoms could be attributable to
acute stress disorder symptoms.
Prevalence
The prevalence of acute stress disorder in recently trauma-exposed populations (i.e., within 1
month of trauma exposure) varies according to the nature of the event and the context in which it
is assessed. In research conducted in Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States, acute
stress disorder was identified in less than 20% of cases following traumatic events that do not
involve interpersonal assault—for example, motor vehicle accidents, mild TBI, severe burns, and
industrial accidents. Higher rates (i.e., 19%–50%) were usually found following interpersonal
traumatic events (e.g., assault, rape).
Development and Course
By definition, acute stress disorder cannot be diagnosed until 3 days after a traumatic event.
Although acute stress disorder may progress to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) after 1
month, it may also be a transient stress response that remits within 1 month of trauma exposure
and does not result in PTSD. Approximately half of individuals who eventually develop PTSD
initially present with acute stress disorder. Longitudinal analyses indicate
317
that acute stress symptoms can remit, remain constant, or worsen over time, largely as a result of
ongoing life stressors or further traumatic events.
The forms of reexperiencing can vary across development. Unlike adults or adolescents,
young children may report frightening dreams without content that clearly reflects aspects of the
trauma (e.g., waking in fright in the aftermath of the trauma but being unable to relate the content
of the dream to the traumatic event). Children age 6 years and younger are more likely than older
children to express reexperiencing symptoms through play that refers directly or symbolically to
