Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
the trauma. For example, a very young child who survived a fire may draw pictures of flames.
Young children also do not necessarily manifest fearful reactions at the time of the exposure or
even during reexperiencing. Parents typically report a range of emotional expressions, such as
anger, shame, or withdrawal, and even excessively bright positive affect, in young children who
are traumatized. Although children may avoid reminders of the trauma, they sometimes become
preoccupied with reminders (e.g., a young child bitten by a dog may talk about dogs constantly
yet avoid going outside because of fear of coming into contact with a dog).
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Risk factors include prior mental disorder, high levels of negative emotional
responses such as depressed mood and anxiousness (also termed negative affectivity or
neuroticism), greater perceived severity of the traumatic event, and an avoidant coping style. A
tendency to make catastrophic appraisals of the traumatic experience, often characterized by
exaggerated appraisals of future harm, guilt, or hopelessness, is strongly predictive of acute
stress disorder.
First and foremost, an individual must be exposed to a traumatic event to be at
risk for acute stress disorder. Risk factors for the disorder include a history of prior trauma.
Elevated reactivity, as reflected by acoustic startle response, prior to
trauma exposure increases the risk for developing acute stress disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The profile of symptoms of acute stress disorder may vary cross-culturally, particularly with
respect to dissociative symptoms, nightmares, avoidance, and somatic symptoms (e.g., dizziness,
shortness of breath, heat sensations, pain complaints). Acute stress reactions may be shaped by
cultural values and norms regarding the expression of extreme emotions, even in extraordinary
situations. Cultural concepts of distress shape the local symptom profiles of acute stress disorder.
Some cultural groups may display variants of dissociative responses, such as possession or
trancelike behaviors in the initial month after trauma exposure. Panic symptoms may be salient
in acute stress disorder among Cambodians because of the association of traumatic exposure
with panic-like khyâl attacks, and ataque de nervios among Latin Americans may also follow a
traumatic exposure. For more information regarding cultural concepts of distress, refer to the
Section III chapter “Culture and Psychiatric Diagnosis.”
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Acute stress disorder is more prevalent among women than among men in studies across
multiple countries. The increased risk for the disorder in women may be attributable to a greater
likelihood of exposure to the types of traumatic events with a high conditional risk for acute
stress disorder, such as rape, other interpersonal violence, and childhood trauma, including
sexual abuse. Other factors likely contributing to the higher prevalence in women include gender
differences in the emotional and cognitive processing of trauma. Sex-linked
318
