Adjustment disorders.
Panic disorder.
Dissociative disorders.
Posttraumatic stress disorder.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Psychotic disorders.
neurobiological differences in stress response as well as sociocultural factors may also contribute
to women’s increased risk for acute stress disorder.
Functional Consequences of Acute Stress Disorder
Impaired functioning in social, interpersonal, or occupational domains has been shown across
survivors of accidents, assault, and rape who develop acute stress disorder. The extreme levels of
anxiety that may be associated with acute stress disorder may interfere with sleep, energy levels,
and capacity to attend to tasks. Avoidance in acute stress disorder can result in generalized
withdrawal from many situations that are perceived as potentially threatening, which can lead to
nonattendance of medical appointments, avoidance of driving to important appointments, and
absenteeism from work.
Differential Diagnosis
In adjustment disorders, the stressor can be of any severity rather than of
the severity and type required by Criterion A of acute stress disorder. The diagnosis of an
adjustment disorder is used when the response to a Criterion A event does not meet the criteria
for acute stress disorder (or another specific mental disorder) and when the symptom pattern of
acute stress disorder occurs in response to a stressor that does not meet Criterion A for exposure
to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence (e.g., spouse leaving, being fired).
For example, severe stress reactions to life-threatening illnesses that may include some acute
stress disorder symptoms may be more appropriately described as an adjustment disorder. Some
forms of acute stress response do not include acute stress disorder symptoms and may be
characterized by anger, depression, or guilt. These responses are more appropriately described as
primarily an adjustment disorder. Depressive or anger responses in an adjustment disorder may
involve rumination about the traumatic event, as opposed to involuntary and intrusive distressing
memories in acute stress disorder.
Spontaneous panic attacks are very common in acute stress disorder. However,
panic disorder is diagnosed only if panic attacks are unexpected and there is anxiety about future
attacks or maladaptive changes in behavior associated with fear of dire consequences of the
attacks.
Severe dissociative responses (in the absence of characteristic acute stress
disorder symptoms) may be diagnosed as derealization/depersonalization disorder. If severe
amnesia of the trauma persists in the absence of characteristic acute stress disorder symptoms,
the diagnosis of dissociative amnesia may be indicated.
Acute stress disorder is distinguished from PTSD because the
symptom pattern in acute stress disorder must resolve within 1 month of the traumatic event. If
the symptoms persist for more than 1 month and meet criteria for PTSD, the diagnosis is
changed from acute stress disorder to PTSD.
In obsessive-compulsive disorder, there are recurrent intrusive
thoughts, but these meet the definition of an obsession. In addition, the intrusive thoughts are not
related to an experienced traumatic event, compulsions are usually present, and other symptoms
of acute stress disorder are typically absent.
Flashbacks in acute stress disorder must be distinguished from illusions,
