Traumatic brain injury.
hallucinations, and other perceptual disturbances that may occur in schizophrenia, other
psychotic disorders, depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features, a delirium,
substance/medication-induced disorders, and psychotic disorders due to another medical
condition. Acute stress disorder flashbacks are distinguished from these other perceptual
disturbances by being directly related to the traumatic experience and by occurring in the
absence of other psychotic or substance-induced features.
319
When a brain injury occurs in the context of a traumatic event (e.g.,
traumatic accident, bomb blast, acceleration/deceleration trauma), symptoms of acute stress
disorder may appear. An event causing head trauma may also constitute a psychological
traumatic event, and TBI-related neurocognitive symptoms are not mutually exclusive and may
occur concurrently. Symptoms previously termed postconcussive (e.g., headaches, dizziness,
sensitivity to light or sound, irritability, concentration deficits) can occur in brain-injured and
non-brain-injured populations, including individuals with acute stress disorder. Because
symptoms of acute stress disorder and TBI-related neurocognitive symptoms can overlap, a
differential diagnosis between acute stress disorder and neurocognitive disorder symptoms
attributable to TBI may be possible based on the presence of symptoms that are distinctive to
each presentation. Whereas reexperiencing and avoidance are characteristic of acute stress
disorder and not the effects of TBI, persistent disorientation and confusion are more specific to
TBI (neurocognitive effects) than to acute stress disorder. Furthermore, differential is aided by
the fact that symptoms of acute stress disorder persist for up to only 1 month following trauma
exposure.
Adjustment Disorders
Diagnostic Criteria
A. The development of emotional or behavioral symptoms in response to an
identifiable stressor(s) occurring within 3 months of the onset of the stressor(s).
B. These symptoms or behaviors are clinically significant, as evidenced by one or
both of the following:
1. Marked distress that is out of proportion to the severity or intensity of the
stressor, taking into account the external context and the cultural factors that
might influence symptom severity and presentation.
2. Significant impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning.
C. The stress-related disturbance does not meet the criteria for another mental
disorder and is not merely an exacerbation of a preexisting mental disorder.
D. The symptoms do not represent normal bereavement and are not better
explained by prolonged grief disorder.
