E. Once the stressor or its consequences have terminated, the symptoms do not
persist for more than an additional 6 months.
Specify whether:
F43.21 With depressed mood: Low mood, tearfulness, or feelings of
hopelessness are predominant.
F43.22 With anxiety: Nervousness, worry, jitteriness, or separation anxiety is
predominant.
F43.23 With mixed anxiety and depressed mood: A combination of
depression and anxiety is predominant.
F43.24 With disturbance of conduct: Disturbance of conduct is predominant.
F43.25 With mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct: Both emotional
symptoms (e.g., depression, anxiety) and a disturbance of conduct are
predominant.
F43.20 Unspecified: For maladaptive reactions that are not classifiable as one
of the specific subtypes of adjustment disorder.
320
Specify if:
Acute: This specifier can be used to indicate persistence of symptoms for less
than 6 months.
Persistent (chronic): This specifier can be used to indicate persistence of
symptoms for 6 months or longer. By definition, symptoms cannot persist for
more than 6 months after the termination of the stressor or its consequences.
The persistent specifier therefore applies when the duration of the disturbance is
longer than 6 months in response to a chronic stressor or to a stressor that has
enduring consequences.
Specifiers
By definition, an adjustment disorder must resolve within 6 months of the termination of the
stressor or its consequences. However, the symptoms may persist for a prolonged period (i.e.,
longer than 6 months) if they occur in response to a persistent stressor (e.g., a chronic disabling
other medical condition) or to a stressor that has enduring consequences (e.g., the financial and
emotional difficulties resulting from a divorce). The duration of the symptoms of an adjustment
disorder can be indicated by using the acute or persistent (chronic) specifiers. The acute specifier
is used to indicate persistence of symptoms for less than 6 months. The persistent (chronic)
specifier is used to indicate persistence of symptoms for 6 months or longer. This latter specifier
therefore applies when the duration of the disturbance is longer than 6 months in response to a
persistent stressor or to a stressor that has enduring consequences.
Diagnostic Features
