Environmental.
The presence of emotional or behavioral symptoms in response to an identifiable stressor is the
essential feature of adjustment disorders (Criterion A). The stressor may be a single event (e.g., a
termination of a romantic relationship), or there may be multiple stressors (e.g., marked business
difficulties and marital problems). Stressors may be recurrent (e.g., associated with seasonal
business crises, unfulfilling sexual relationships) or continuous (e.g., a persistent painful illness
with increasing disability, living in a crime-ridden neighborhood). Stressors may affect a single
individual, an entire family, or a larger group or community (e.g., a natural disaster). Some
stressors may accompany specific developmental events (e.g., going to school, leaving a parental
home, reentering a parental home, getting married, becoming a parent, failing to attain
occupational goals, retirement).
Adjustment disorders may be diagnosed following the death of a loved one when the
intensity, quality, or persistence of grief reactions exceeds what normally might be expected,
when cultural, religious, or age-appropriate norms are taken into account and the grief reaction
does not meet criteria for prolonged grief disorder.
Prevalence
Adjustment disorders are common, although prevalence may vary widely as a function of the
population studied and the assessment methods used. The percentage of individuals in outpatient
mental health treatment in the United States with a principal diagnosis of an adjustment disorder
ranges from approximately 5% to 20%. Rates of adjustment disorder may be higher in women,
as noted by research in Denmark. In Australian, Canadian, Israeli, and U.S. hospital psychiatric
consultation settings, an adjustment disorder was often the most common diagnosis in the 1990s,
frequently reaching 50%.
Development and Course
By definition, the disturbance in adjustment disorders begins within 3 months of onset of a
stressor. If the stressor is an acute event (e.g., being fired from a job), the onset of the
disturbance is usually immediate (i.e., within a few days) and the duration is relatively brief
321
(i.e., no more than a few months). If the stressor or its consequences persist, the adjustment
disorder may also continue to be present and become the persistent form. By definition, if
symptoms persist beyond 6 months after the stressor or its consequences have ceased, the
diagnosis of adjustment disorder would no longer apply.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Persons from disadvantaged life circumstances experience a high rate of stressors
and may be at increased risk for adjustment disorders.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Because the nature, meaning, and experience of the stressors and the evaluation of the response
to stressors may vary across cultures, cultural context is key in determining whether the
