Major depressive disorder.
Posttraumatic stress disorder and acute stress disorder.
adjustment response is maladaptive. Migrants and refugees may experience stressful major
contextual and cultural changes that can make this assessment challenging. Suffering is assumed
to be an intrinsic aspect of normal life in some cultural contexts, such that distressful reactions to
stressful life events may not be viewed as maladaptive or worthy of treatment. Self-immolation is
also a risk associated with adjustment disorder in some cultural contexts.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Adjustment disorders are associated with an increased risk of suicide attempts and suicide.
Among migrant populations, including Turkish migrants in Western Europe and South Asian or
South East Asian migrants in Gulf countries, adjustment disorder was found to be among the
most common diagnoses associated with suicide-related behavior.
Functional Consequences of Adjustment Disorders
The subjective distress or impairment in functioning associated with adjustment disorders is
frequently manifested as decreased performance at work or school and temporary changes in
social relationships. An adjustment disorder may complicate the course of illness in individuals
who have another medical condition (e.g., decreased compliance with the recommended medical
regimen; increased length of hospital stay).
Differential Diagnosis
If an individual has symptoms that meet criteria for a major depressive
disorder in response to a stressor, the diagnosis of an adjustment disorder is not applicable. The
symptom profile of major depressive disorder differentiates it from adjustment disorders.
In adjustment disorders, the stressor can be
of any severity rather than of the severity and type required by Criterion A of acute stress
disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). In distinguishing adjustment disorders from
these two posttraumatic diagnoses, there are both timing and symptom profile considerations.
Adjustment disorders can be diagnosed immediately and persist up to 6 months after exposure to
the traumatic event, whereas acute stress disorder can only occur between 3 days and 1 month of
exposure to the stressor, and PTSD cannot be diagnosed until at least 1 month has passed since
the occurrence of the traumatic stressor. The required symptom profiles for PTSD and acute
stress disorder differentiate them from the adjustment disorders. With regard to symptom
profiles, an adjustment disorder may be diagnosed following a traumatic event when an
individual exhibits symptoms of either acute stress disorder or PTSD that do not meet or exceed
the diagnostic threshold for either disorder. Because adjustment disorder cannot persist for more
than 6 months after termination of the stressor or its consequences, cases in which symptoms
occurring in response
322
to a traumatic event that fall short of the diagnostic threshold for PTSD and that persist for
longer than 6 months should be diagnosed as other specified trauma- and stressor-related
disorder. An adjustment disorder should also be diagnosed for individuals who have not been
exposed to a traumatic event meeting Criterion A for PTSD, but who otherwise exhibit the full
