Personality disorders.
Bereavement.
Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions.
Normative stress reactions.
F43.8
symptom profile of either acute stress disorder or PTSD.
With regard to personality disorders, some personality features may be
associated with a vulnerability to situational distress that may resemble an adjustment disorder.
The lifetime history of personality functioning will help inform the interpretation of distressed
behaviors to aid in distinguishing a long-standing personality disorder from an adjustment
disorder. In addition to some personality disorders incurring vulnerability to distress, stressors
may also exacerbate personality disorder symptoms. In the presence of a personality disorder, if
the symptom criteria for an adjustment disorder are met, and the stress-related disturbance
exceeds what may be attributable to maladaptive personality disorder symptoms (i.e., Criterion C
is met), then the diagnosis of an adjustment disorder should be made.
Clinically significant acute bereavement-related distress may sometimes be
diagnosed as an adjustment disorder if the bereavement is judged to be out of proportion to what
would be expected or significantly impairs self-care and interpersonal relations. When such
symptoms persist for more than 12 months after the death, the diagnosis is either prolonged grief
disorder if full criteria are met or else other specified trauma- and stressor-related disorder.
In psychological factors affecting other
medical conditions, specific psychological entities (e.g., psychological symptoms, behaviors,
other factors) exacerbate a medical condition. These psychological factors can precipitate,
exacerbate, or put an individual at risk for medical illness, or they can worsen an existing
condition. In contrast, an adjustment disorder is a reaction to the stressor (e.g., having a medical
illness).
When bad things happen, most people get upset. This is not an
adjustment disorder. The diagnosis should only be made when the magnitude of the distress (e.g.,
alterations in mood, anxiety, or conduct) exceeds what would normally be expected (which may
vary in different cultures) or when the adverse event precipitates functional impairment.
Comorbidity
Adjustment disorders can accompany most mental disorders and any medical condition.
Adjustment disorders can be diagnosed in addition to another mental disorder only if the latter
does not explain the particular symptoms that occur in reaction to the stressor. For example, an
individual may develop an adjustment disorder, with depressed mood, after losing a job and at
the same time have a diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Or, an individual may have a
depressive or bipolar disorder and an adjustment disorder as long as the criteria for both are met.
Adjustment disorders are common accompaniments of medical illness and may be the major
psychological response to a medical condition.
Prolonged Grief Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. The death, at least 12 months ago, of a person who was close to the bereaved
