individual (for children and adolescents, at least 6 months ago).
323
B. Since the death, the development of a persistent grief response characterized by
one or both of the following symptoms, which have been present most days to a
clinically significant degree. In addition, the symptom(s) has occurred nearly
every day for at least the last month:
1. Intense yearning/longing for the deceased person.
2. Preoccupation with thoughts or memories of the deceased person (in children
and adolescents, preoccupation may focus on the circumstances of the
death).
C. Since the death, at least three of the following symptoms have been present
most days to a clinically significant degree. In addition, the symptoms have
occurred nearly every day for at least the last month:
1. Identity disruption (e.g., feeling as though part of oneself has died) since the
death.
2. Marked sense of disbelief about the death.
3. Avoidance of reminders that the person is dead (in children and adolescents,
may be characterized by efforts to avoid reminders).
4. Intense emotional pain (e.g., anger, bitterness, sorrow) related to the death.
5. Difficulty reintegrating into one’s relationships and activities after the death
(e.g., problems engaging with friends, pursuing interests, or planning for the
future).
6. Emotional numbness (absence or marked reduction of emotional experience)
as a result of the death.
7. Feeling that life is meaningless as a result of the death.
8. Intense loneliness as a result of the death.
D. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
E. The duration and severity of the bereavement reaction clearly exceed expected
social, cultural, or religious norms for the individual’s culture and context.
F. The symptoms are not better explained by another mental disorder, such as
major depressive disorder or posttraumatic stress disorder, and are not
attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., medication, alcohol)
or another medical condition.
Diagnostic Features
Prolonged grief disorder represents a prolonged maladaptive grief reaction that can be diagnosed
only after at least 12 months (6 months in children and adolescents) have elapsed since the death
of someone with whom the bereaved had a close relationship (Criterion A). Although in general
