this time frame reliably discriminates normal grief from grief that continues to be severe and
impairing, the duration of adaptive grief may vary individually and cross-culturally. The
condition involves the development of a persistent grief response characterized by intense
yearning or longing for the deceased person (often with intense sorrow and frequent crying) or
preoccupation with thoughts or memories of the deceased, although in children and adolescents,
this preoccupation may focus on the circumstances of the death. The intense yearning/longing or
the preoccupation has been present most days to a clinically significant degree and has occurred
nearly every day for at least the last month (Criterion B). Moreover, since the death, at least three
additional symptoms have been present most days to a clinically significant degree and have
occurred nearly every day for at least the past month. These symptoms include identity
disruption since the death (e.g., feeling as though part of oneself has died) (Criterion C1); a
marked sense of disbelief about the death (Criterion C2); avoidance of reminders that the person
is dead, which in children and adolescents may be characterized by efforts to avoid reminders
(Criterion C3); intense emotional pain (e.g., anger, bitterness, guilt) since the death (Criterion
C4); having difficulty reintegrating into personal relationships and activities since the death (e.g.,
problems
324
engaging with friends, pursuing interests, or planning for the future) (Criterion C5); emotional
numbness (absence or marked reduction of emotional experience) as a result of the death
(Criterion C6); feeling that life is meaningless as a result of the death (Criterion C7); or intense
loneliness as a consequence of the death (Criterion C8).
The symptoms of prolonged grief disorder must result in clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning in the bereaved
individual (Criterion D). The nature, duration, and severity of the bereavement reaction must
clearly exceed expected social, cultural, or religious norms for the individual’s culture and
context (Criterion E). Although there are variations in how grief can manifest, the symptoms of
prolonged grief disorder occur across genders and in diverse social and cultural groups.
Associated Features
Individuals with symptoms of prolonged grief disorder often experience maladaptive cognitions
about the self, guilt about the death, and diminished future life expectancy and life goals.
Somatic complaints commonly accompany the condition and may be related to comorbid
depression and anxiety, social identity disruption, and increased health care visits; the somatic
symptoms may be associated with those that were experienced by the deceased (e.g., changes in
appetite). Harmful health behaviors related to decreased self-care and concern are also common
in individuals with symptoms of prolonged grief disorder. Hallucinations about the deceased
(e.g., hearing the deceased person’s voice) may occur during normal grief but may be more
common in individuals with symptoms of prolonged grief disorder; hallucinations experienced
by individuals with prolonged grief disorder symptoms may be associated with disruptions of
social identity and purpose related to the death (e.g., confusion about one’s role in life, feeling of
meaninglessness). Other associated features of prolonged grief disorder include bitterness, anger,
or restlessness; blaming others for the death; and decreased sleep quantity and quality.
