Prevalence
The prevalence of DSM-5 prolonged grief disorder in adults is unknown. Meta-analysis of
studies across four continents that used a different definition for prolonged grief disorder with at
least a 6-month duration postloss suggests a pooled prevalence of 9.8%; however, there was
substantial methodological heterogeneity across studies (e.g., in symptom definitions, measures,
duration of bereavement), which affected the prevalence findings. Populations with elevated
exposure to trauma may have higher prevalence rates. Mean prevalence of prolonged grief
presentations may be higher in high-income Western countries than in high- and upper-middle-
income Asian countries, but recent studies in China have revealed higher rates and substantial
variation. Prevalence of persistent complex bereavement disorder (included in DSM-5 Section
III, “Conditions for Further Study”) among bereaved U.S. youth in the community was estimated
at 18%.
Development and Course
There are limited data on the course of prolonged grief disorder across the life span. Symptoms
usually begin within the initial months after the death, although there may be a delay before the
full syndrome appears. Preliminary evidence suggests that course may be especially prolonged
among parents after the death of a child. The course of prolonged grief disorder may be
complicated by comorbid posttraumatic stress disorder, which is more common in situations of
bereavement following the violent death of a loved one (e.g., murder, suicide) when grief for the
bereaved may be accompanied by personal life threat and/or witnessing of violent and potentially
gruesome death. Older age may be associated with a higher risk of developing the disorder after
the death of a loved one. Older adults with prolonged grief disorder symptoms may be at
elevated risk for progressive cognitive decline.
325
In children, distress may be expressed in play and behavior, developmental regressions, and
anxious or protest behavior at times of separation and reunion. Young children may experience
symptoms of prolonged grief disorder in specific ways because of their age. The loss of a
primary caregiver may be particularly traumatic for a young child, given the disorganizing
effects of the caregiver’s absence. Young children may protest or become angry when daily care
activities are performed differently than by the deceased (e.g., cooking, discipline, bedtime
rituals). They may express intense insecurity about their future, often manifested as worries
about the health and safety of caregivers and about themselves, with repeated questions about
death. They may engage in searching for the deceased because they do not understand the
permanence of death. Young children tend toward somatic manifestations such as disturbances in
sleep, eating, digestion, and level of energy. They may express yearning in thought and play as a
wish, literally, to physically reunite with the deceased to overcome the painful physical
separation (e.g., to climb a ladder to heaven or lie in the ground next to a parent). Young children
typically do not understand or describe numbing, whereas adolescents may describe “not feeling
anything.”
In children and adolescents, ongoing preoccupation with the circumstances of the death
might involve focusing on distressing aspects of physical deterioration over the course of a fatal
