Environmental.
illness and/or the inability of a caregiver to perform vital caregiving functions. Identity
disruption may include feeling profoundly different from others, often in response to loss
reminders (e.g., making Mother’s Day cards at school, watching a friend enjoy a hobby with a
sibling). Children and adolescents may verbally, in their behavior, or through emotional
withdrawal show reluctance to join adults in activities that serve as loss reminders. They may
experience intense emotional pain over feeling deprived (“robbed”) of the deceased’s help with
ongoing developmental tasks (e.g., onset of menses). Separation distress may be predominant in
younger children, and distress over disruptions in social identity (e.g., confusion about purpose
in life) and risk for comorbid depression can increasingly manifest in older children and
adolescents.
Failure to achieve age-appropriate developmental milestones and transitions is a
manifestation of failure to reintegrate into life roles. For older children and adolescents, feeling
that life is meaningless without the person who died may include giving up on developmental
aspirations (“It’s not worth trying if they can’t be here”), not caring about risky behavior (“So
what if I get hurt or die?”), or feeling that their future is “ruined.” Older children and adolescents
may be apprehensive over sharing a similar fate as the deceased, including premature death.
Loneliness may be intensified by keeping grief private, sometimes over not wanting to add to the
distress of a grieving caregiver or to avoid presumed stigma from peers.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Risk for prolonged grief disorder symptoms is heightened by increased
dependency on the deceased prior to the death, by the death of a child, by violent or unexpected
deaths, and by economic stressors. The disorder has a higher prevalence following the death of a
spouse/partner or child compared with other kinship relationships to the deceased. Disturbances
in caregiver availability and support increase the risk for bereaved children.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The symptoms of prolonged grief disorder are observed across cultural settings, but grief
responses may manifest in culturally specific ways, including in expected duration, and show
historical variation. For example, across cultures, nightmares about the deceased may be
especially distressing because of their attributed significance; the prevalence of hallucinations of
the deceased or of grief-related somatic symptoms may vary; and indirect expressions of
prolonged grief disorder–related functional impairment (e.g., unhealthy
326
behaviors like drinking or poor self-care) may be more prevalent than direct expressions of grief.
The inability to carry out funerary rituals in some cultures may worsen symptoms of prolonged
grief disorder, possibly because of interpretation of their impact on the spiritual status of the
deceased. Some studies suggest higher prevalence of the symptoms of prolonged grief disorder
in African Americans relative to non-Hispanic Whites; the cause for these elevations requires
further study in areas such as differential exposure to sudden or violent death. Differences in
mourning practices may contribute to the cultural prescription or prohibition of specific grief
expressions, and cultural norms about the social status of the bereaved may affect grief intensity
