Normal grief.
and duration, such as different levels of support or societal sanction toward remarriage
depending on the gender of the bereaved. Diagnosis of the disorder requires that the persistent
and severe responses go beyond cultural norms of grief responses and not be better explained by
culturally specific mourning rituals.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Some studies find higher disorder prevalence or symptom severity among bereaved women, but
other studies conclude the gender disparity is small and/or not statistically significant.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Individuals with symptoms of prolonged grief disorder are at heightened risk for suicidal
ideation, even after adjustment for the effect of major depression and PTSD. The association of
prolonged grief disorder symptoms and suicidal ideation is consistent across the life span and
cross-nationally. However, the existing literature does not establish whether suicidal ideation
associated with symptoms of prolonged grief disorder is linked to a higher incidence of suicidal
behavior. Stigma, isolation, thwarted belongingness, avoidance, and psychological distress in
bereaved individuals are associated with suicidal ideation. Compared with individuals whose
bereavement is due to nonviolent causes, individuals whose prolonged grief disorder symptoms
are the result of a violent loss (e.g., homicide, suicide, accident) are at greater risk for suicidal
ideation. Similarly, individuals who experience the death of a child, especially if the child is
younger than 25, are more likely to develop prolonged grief disorder symptoms that are
associated with suicidal ideation.
Functional Consequences of Prolonged Grief Disorder
Symptoms of prolonged grief disorder are associated with impairments in work and social
functioning and with harmful health behaviors, such as increased tobacco and alcohol use. They
are also associated with marked increases in risks for serious medical conditions, including
cardiac disease, hypertension, cancer, immunological deficiency, and reduced quality of life.
Long-term developmental consequences among children and adolescents include premature
school withdrawal, diminished educational aspirations, and reduced academic attainment; young
women in particular may be hesitant to marry as they transition to adulthood. Impaired cognitive
functioning may be associated with symptoms of prolonged grief disorder, especially in middle-
age and older adults.
Differential Diagnosis
Prolonged grief disorder is distinguished from normal grief by the presence of
severe grief reactions that persist at least 12 months (6 months in children or adolescents) after
the death of a person who was close to the bereaved individual. It is only when severe levels of
grief response persist for the specified duration following the death, interfere with the
individual’s capacity to function, and exceed cultural, social, or religious norms that prolonged
grief disorder is diagnosed. In evaluating the requirement for clinically significant symptoms to
be present most days over the past month, it should be noted that marked increases in grief
severity can be seen in normal grieving around calendar
