Depressive disorders.
Posttraumatic stress disorder.
Separation anxiety disorder.
Psychotic disorder.
327
days that are reminders of the loss, such as the anniversary of the death, birthdays, wedding
anniversaries, and holidays; this exacerbation of grief severity does not by itself, in the absence
of persistent grief at other times, constitute evidence of prolonged grief disorder.
Prolonged grief disorder, major depressive disorder, and persistent
depressive disorder share several symptoms, including low mood, crying, and suicidal thinking.
However, in prolonged grief disorder the distress is focused on feelings of loss and separation
from a loved one rather than reflecting generalized low mood. Major depressive disorder may
also be preceded by the death of a loved one, with or without comorbid prolonged grief disorder.
Individuals who experience bereavement as a result of violent or
accidental death may develop both PTSD and prolonged grief disorder. Both conditions can
involve intrusive thoughts and avoidance. Whereas intrusions in PTSD revolve around the
traumatic event (which may have caused the death of a loved one), intrusive memories in
prolonged grief disorder focus on thoughts about many aspects of the relationship with the
deceased, including positive aspects of the relationship and distress over the separation. Unlike
avoidance in PTSD, which is manifested by avoidance of memories, thoughts, or feelings
associated with the traumatic event that led to the death of the loved one (e.g., memories of the
fatal automobile accident that killed the loved one), the avoidance in prolonged grief disorder is
of reminders that the loved one is no longer present (e.g., avoidance of activities carried out
together with the deceased). Moreover, reexperiencing memories in PTSD tend to be more
perceptual, with the individual reporting that the memory feels like it is occurring in the “here
and now,” which tends not to be the case in prolonged grief disorder. In prolonged grief disorder,
there is also a yearning for the deceased, which is absent in PTSD.
Separation anxiety disorder is characterized by anxiety about
separation from current attachment figures, whereas prolonged grief disorder involves distress
about separation from a deceased person.
Hallucinations about the deceased (e.g., seeing the deceased in a favorite
chair) or transient sensations about the presence of the deceased (e.g., by touch, voice, or sight)
are common cross-culturally during normal grief, may be experienced as reassuring, and often
occur while the individual is falling asleep (hypnagogic). To receive a diagnosis of psychotic
disorder, individuals with prolonged grief disorder must also endorse other symptoms of
psychosis, such as delusions, disorganized thinking, or negative symptoms.
Comorbidity
The most common comorbid disorders with symptoms of prolonged grief disorder are major
depressive disorder, PTSD, and substance use disorders. PTSD is more frequently comorbid with
prolonged grief disorder symptoms when the death occurred in violent or accidental
circumstances. Separation anxiety disorder involving major living attachment figures may be
comorbid with symptoms of prolonged grief disorder.
Other Specified Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorder
