F43.8
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a trauma-
and stressor-related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do
not meet the
328
full criteria for any of the disorders in the trauma- and stressor-related disorders
diagnostic class. The other specified trauma- and stressor-related disorder category
is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate the specific
reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for any specific trauma- and
stressor-related disorder. This is done by recording “other specified trauma- and
stressor-related disorder” followed by the specific reason (e.g., “persistent response
to trauma with PTSD-like symptoms”).
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified”
designation include the following:
1. Adjustment-like disorders with delayed onset of symptoms that occur more
than 3 months after the stressor.
2. Adjustment-like disorders with prolonged duration of more than 6 months
without prolonged duration of stressor.
3. Persistent response to trauma with PTSD-like symptoms (i.e., symptoms
occurring in response to a traumatic event that fall short of the diagnostic
threshold for PTSD and that persist for longer than 6 months, sometimes referred
to as “subthreshold/partial PTSD”).
4. Ataque de nervios: See “Culture and Psychiatric Diagnosis” in Section III.
5. Other cultural syndromes: See “Culture and Psychiatric Diagnosis” in Section
III.
Unspecified Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorder
F43.9
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a trauma-
and stressor-related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do
not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the trauma- and stressor-related
disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified trauma- and stressor-related disorder
category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to specify the reason
that the criteria are not met for a specific trauma- and stressor-related disorder and
includes presentations in which there is insufficient information to make a more
