Dissociative Disorders
Dissociative disorders are characterized by a disruption of and/or discontinuity in the
normal integration of consciousness, memory, identity, emotion, perception, body representation,
motor control, and behavior. Dissociative symptoms can potentially disrupt every area of
psychological functioning. This chapter includes dissociative identity disorder, dissociative
amnesia, depersonalization/derealization disorder, other specified dissociative disorder, and
unspecified dissociative disorder.
Dissociative disorders are frequently found in the aftermath of a wide variety of
psychologically traumatic experiences in children, adolescents, and adults. Throughout this
chapter, “traumatic experiences” refers to experiences that result in psychological sequelae, as
opposed to the physical impact that can cause traumatic brain injury. Therefore, in DSM-5, the
dissociative disorders are placed next to, but are not part of, the trauma- and stressor-related
disorders, reflecting the close relationship between these diagnostic classes. Both acute stress
disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder include dissociative symptoms, such as amnesia,
flashbacks, numbing, and depersonalization/derealization.
Dissociative symptoms are experienced as unbidden intrusions into awareness and behavior,
with accompanying losses of continuity in subjective experience (i.e., ‘‘positive’’ dissociative
symptoms such as division of identity, depersonalization, and derealization) and/or inability to
access information or to control mental functions that normally are readily amenable to access or
control (i.e., “negative” dissociative symptoms such as amnesia).
Across cultural contexts, risk factors for dissociative pathology include earlier onset of
trauma; neglect and sexual, physical, and emotional abuse by parents; cumulative early life
trauma and adversities; and repeated sustained trauma or torture associated with captivity (e.g.,
experienced by prisoners of war, victims of trafficking).
Depersonalization/derealization disorder is characterized by clinically significant persistent
or recurrent depersonalization (i.e., experiences of unreality or detachment from one’s mind, self,
or body) and/or derealization (i.e., experiences of unreality or detachment from one’s
surroundings). These alterations of experience are accompanied by intact reality testing. There is
no evidence of any distinction between predominantly depersonalization and predominantly
derealization symptoms. Individuals with this disorder can have depersonalization, derealization,
or both.
Dissociative amnesia is characterized by an inability to recall autobiographical information
that is inconsistent with normal forgetting. The amnesia may be localized (i.e., an event or period
of time), selective (i.e., a specific aspect of an event), or generalized (i.e., identity and life
history). In dissociative amnesia, memory deficits are primarily retrograde and often associated
with traumatic experiences (e.g., lack of recall of third grade when the individual was kidnapped
and held hostage). Although some individuals with amnesia promptly notice that they have gaps
or a sense of fragmentation in their remote memory, most individuals with dissociative disorders
