F44.81
are initially unaware of their amnesia or minimize or rationalize the deficits. For them, awareness
of amnesia occurs when they realize that they do not recall their personal identity or when
circumstances make these individuals aware that important autobiographical information is
missing (e.g., when they discover
330
evidence or are told of past events that they cannot recall). Generalized dissociative amnesia
with loss of a major part or all of the individual’s life history and/or identity is rare.
Dissociative identity disorder is characterized by a) the presence of two or more distinct
personality states or an experience of possession and b) recurrent episodes of dissociative
amnesia. The fragmentation/division of identity may vary across cultural contexts (e.g.,
possession-form presentations) and with circumstance. Thus, individuals may experience
discontinuities in identity and memory that may not be immediately evident to others or are
obscured by attempts to hide dysfunction. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder
experience recurrent, inexplicable intrusions into their conscious functioning and sense of self
(e.g., voices; dissociated actions and speech; intrusive thoughts, emotions, and impulses);
alterations of sense of self (e.g., attitudes, preferences, and feeling like their body or actions are
not their own); odd changes of perception (e.g., depersonalization or derealization, such as
feeling detached, as if watching themself from outside their body); and intermittent functional
neurological symptoms. Stress often produces transient exacerbation of dissociative symptoms
that makes them more evident.
The residual category of other specified dissociative disorder includes presentations in which
symptoms characteristic of a dissociative disorder that cause clinically significant distress or
impairment predominate but do not meet the criteria for any of the specific dissociative
disorders. Examples 
include 
identity disturbances associated with less-than-marked
discontinuities in sense of self and agency, alterations of identity, or episodes of possession in
the absence of a history of episodes of dissociative amnesia; identity disturbance due to
prolonged and intensive coercive persuasion as may occur in sects/cults or terrorist
organizations; acute dissociative reactions to stressful events that last less than 1 month; and
dissociative trance, which is characterized by an acute narrowing or complete loss of awareness
of immediate surroundings that manifests as profound unresponsiveness or insensitivity to
environmental stimuli.
Dissociative Identity Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Disruption of identity characterized by two or more distinct personality states,
which may be described in some cultures as an experience of possession. The
disruption in identity involves marked discontinuity in sense of self and sense of
agency, accompanied by related alterations in affect, behavior, consciousness,
memory, perception, cognition, and/or sensory-motor functioning. These signs
