and symptoms may be observed by others or reported by the individual.
B. Recurrent gaps in the recall of everyday events, important personal information,
and/or traumatic events that are inconsistent with ordinary forgetting.
C. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The disturbance is not a normal part of a broadly accepted cultural or religious
practice.
Note: In children, the symptoms are not better explained by imaginary playmates
or other fantasy play.
E. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., blackouts or chaotic behavior during alcohol intoxication) or another
medical condition (e.g., complex partial seizures).
331
Diagnostic Features
The defining feature of dissociative identity disorder is the presence of two or more distinct
personality states or an experience of possession (Criterion A). The overtness or covertness of
these personality states varies as a function of psychological motivation, current level of stress,
cultural context, internal conflicts and dynamics, and emotional resilience, among other factors.
Sustained periods of identity confusion/alteration may occur when psychosocial pressures are
severe and/or prolonged. In those cases of dissociative identity disorder that present as the
individual being possessed by external identities (e.g., spirits, demons) (possession-form
dissociative identity disorder), and in a small proportion of non-possession-form cases,
manifestations of alternate identities are readily observable. Most individuals with non-
possession-form dissociative identity disorder do not overtly display, or only subtly display, their
discontinuity of identity, and only a minority present to clinical attention with discernible
alternation of identities. The elaboration of dissociative personality states with different names,
wardrobes, hairstyles, handwritings, accents, and so forth, occurs in only a minority of
individuals with the non-possession-form dissociative identity disorder and is not essential to
diagnosis. In those cases where alternate personality states cannot be directly observed, the
presence of distinct personality states can be identified by sudden alterations or discontinuities in
the individual’s sense of self and sense of agency (Criterion A), and recurrent dissociative
amnesias (Criterion B).
Criterion A symptoms are related to discontinuities of experience that can affect any aspect
of an individual’s functioning. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder may report the
feeling that they have suddenly become depersonalized observers of their own speech and
actions, which they may feel powerless to stop (i.e., impaired sense of self and impaired sense of
agency). These individuals may also report perceptions of voices (e.g., a child’s voice, voices
commenting on the individual’s thoughts or behavior, persecutory voices and command
hallucinations). In some cases, hearing voices is specifically denied, but the individual reports
multiple, perplexing, independent thought streams over which the individual experiences no
control. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder may report hallucinations in all sensory
