modalities: auditory, visual, tactile, olfactory, and gustatory.
Strong emotions, impulses, thoughts, and even speech or other actions may suddenly
materialize, without a sense of personal ownership or control (i.e., lack of sense of agency).
Conversely, thoughts and emotions may unexpectedly vanish, and speech and actions are
abruptly inhibited. These experiences are frequently reported as ego-dystonic and puzzling.
Attitudes, outlooks, and personal preferences (e.g., about food, activities, gender identity) may
suddenly shift. Individuals may report that their bodies feel different (e.g., like a small child, the
opposite gender, different ages simultaneously). Alterations in sense of self and agency may be
accompanied by a feeling that attitudes, emotions, and behaviors—even the individual’s own
body—are “not mine” or are “not under my control.” Although most Criterion A symptoms are
subjective, these sudden discontinuities in speech, affect, and behavior may be witnessed by
family, friends, or the clinician.
In most individuals with dissociative identity disorder, switching/shifting of states is subtle
and may occur with only subtle changes in overt presentation. State switching may be more overt
in the possession form of dissociative identity disorder. In general, the individual with
dissociative identity disorder experiences himself or herself as multiple, simultaneously
overlapping and interfering states.
Dissociative amnesia (Criterion B) manifests in several major domains: 1) gaps in any aspect
of autobiographical memory (e.g., important life events like getting married or giving birth, lack
of recall of all school experiences before high school); 2) lapses in memory of recent events or
well-learned skills (e.g., how to do one’s job, use a computer, cook or drive); and 3) discovery of
possessions that the individual has no recollection of ever owning (e.g., clothing, weapons, tools,
writings or drawings that he or she must have created).
332
Dissociative fugues, with amnesia for travel, are common. Individuals may report suddenly
finding themselves in another city, at work, or even at home: in the closet, under the bed, or
running out of the house. Amnesia in individuals with dissociative identity disorder is not limited
to stressful or traumatic events; it can involve everyday events as well. Individuals may report
major gaps in ongoing memory (e.g., experiencing “time loss,” “blackouts,” or “coming to” in
the midst of doing something). Dissociative amnesia may be apparent to others (e.g., the
individual does not recall something others witnessed that he or she did or said, cannot remember
his or her own name, or may fail to recognize spouse, children, or close friends). Minimization or
rationalization of amnesia is common.
Possession-form identities in dissociative identity disorder typically manifest behaviorally as
if a “spirit,” supernatural being, or outside person has taken control, with the individual speaking
or acting in a distinctly different manner. For example, an individual’s behavior may give the
appearance that her identity has been replaced by the “ghost” of a girl who died by suicide in the
same community years before, speaking and acting as though she were still alive. The identities
that arise during possession-form dissociative identity disorder present recurrently, are unwanted
and involuntary, and cause clinically significant distress or impairment (Criterion C). However,
the majority of possession states that occur around the world are usually part of a broadly
accepted cultural or religious practice and therefore do not meet criteria for dissociative identity
disorder (Criterion D).
