Associated Features
Individuals with dissociative identity disorder typically present with comorbid depression,
anxiety, substance abuse, self-injury, or another common symptom. Nonepileptic seizures and
other functional neurological symptoms are prominent in some presentations of dissociative
identity disorder, especially in some non-Western settings. Some individuals, especially in
Western settings, may present with apparently refractory neurological symptoms, such as
headaches, seizures, or symptoms suggestive of multiple sclerosis.
Individuals with dissociative identity disorder often conceal, or are not fully aware of,
disruptions in consciousness, amnesia, or other dissociative symptoms. Many individuals with
dissociative identity disorder report dissociative flashbacks during which they experience a
sensory reliving of a previous event as though it were occurring in the present, often with a
change of identity, a partial or complete loss of contact with or disorientation to current reality
during the flashback, and a subsequent amnesia for the content of the flashback. Individuals with
the disorder typically report multiple types of interpersonal maltreatment during childhood and
adulthood. Other overwhelming early life events, such as multiple long, painful, early-life
medical procedures, also may be reported. Nonsuicidal self-injury is frequent. On standardized
measures, these individuals report higher levels of hypnotizability and dissociative symptoms
compared with other clinical groups and healthy control subjects. Some individuals experience
transient psychotic phenomena or episodes.
Among personality features, avoidant personality features most often rate highest in
individuals with dissociative identity disorder, and some individuals with dissociative identity
disorder are so avoidant that they prefer to be alone. When decompensated, some individuals
with dissociative identity disorder display features of borderline personality disorder (i.e., self-
destructive high-risk behaviors, and mood instability). Many individuals with dissociative
identity disorder display attachment problems but typically do not exhibit frantic activity to
avoid being abandoned. Some have stable long-term relationships, albeit frequently
dysfunctional and/or abusive ones, from which they may have difficulty extricating themselves.
Obsessional personality features are common in dissociative identity disorder, more so than
histrionic personality features. A subgroup of
333
individuals with dissociative identity disorder have narcissistic and/or antisocial personality
features.
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence of dissociative identity disorder among adults in a small U.S.
community study was 1.5%. Lifetime prevalence of dissociative identity disorder was 1.1% in a
representative sample of community-based women in mid-eastern Turkey.
Development and Course
The disorder may first manifest at almost any age from early childhood to late life. Children
usually do not present with identity shifting, instead presenting primarily with independently
acting, imaginary companions, or as personified “mood” states (Criterion A phenomena).
