Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Course modifiers.
Dissociation in children may generate problems with memory, concentration, and attachment,
and may be associated with traumatic play. In adolescents, dissociative identity disorder
commonly comes to clinical attention because of externalizing symptoms, suicidal/self-
destructive behavior, or rapid behavioral shifts often ascribed to other disorders such as
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or childhood bipolar disorder. Some children with
dissociative identity disorder can also be quite aggressive and irritable. Older individuals with
dissociative identity disorder may present with symptoms that appear to be late-life mood
disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder, paranoia, psychotic mood disorders, or even cognitive
disorders attributable to dissociative amnesia.
Overt identity alteration/confusion may be triggered by many factors, such as later traumatic
experiences (e.g., sexual assault), or even seemingly inconsequential stressors, like a minor
motor vehicle accident. The experience of other major or cumulative life stressors may also
worsen symptoms, including life events such as the individual’s children reaching the same age
at which the individual was significantly abused or traumatized. The death of, or the onset of a
fatal illness in, the individual’s abuser(s) is another example of an event that may worsen
symptoms. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder are at high risk for adult interpersonal
trauma such as rape, intimate partner violence, and sexual exploitation, including ongoing
incestuous abuse into adulthood, as well as adult trafficking.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
In the context of family and attachment pathology, early life trauma (e.g., neglect
and physical, sexual, and emotional abuse, usually before ages 5–6 years) represents a risk factor
for dissociative identity disorder. In studies from diverse geographic regions, about 90% of the
individuals with the disorder report multiple types of early neglect and childhood abuse, often
extending into late adolescence. Some individuals report that maltreatment primarily occurred
outside the family, in school, church, and/or neighborhoods, including being bullied severely.
Other forms of repeated early-life traumatic experiences include multiple, painful childhood
medical and surgical procedures; war; terrorism; or being trafficked beginning in childhood.
Onset has also been described after prolonged and often transgenerational exposure to
dysfunctional family dynamics (e.g., overcontrolling parenting, insecure attachment, emotional
abuse) in the absence of clear neglect or sexual or physical abuse.
Twin studies suggest that genetics account for around 45%–50% of the
interindividual variance in dissociative symptoms, with nonshared, stressful, and traumatic
environmental experiences accounting for most of the additional variance. Several brain regions
have been implicated in the pathophysiology of dissociative identity disorder, including the
orbitofrontal cortex, hippocampus, parahippocampal gyrus, and amygdala.
334
Ongoing sexual, physical, and emotional trauma often leads to significant
difficulties in later functioning. Poorer outcome in adults is commonly related to severe
psychosocial stressors, revictimization, ongoing sexual or physical abuse or exploitation,
intimate partner violence, refractory substance use, eating disorders, severe medical illness,
enmeshment with the individual’s abusive family of origin, or ongoing involvement in criminal
