subgroups. Poorer functioning may also be related to perpetration of child maltreatment or
intimate partner violence by individuals with dissociative identity disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Many features of dissociative identity disorder can be influenced by the individual’s
sociocultural background. In settings where possession symptoms are common (e.g., rural areas
in low- and middle-income countries, among certain religious groups in the United States and
Europe), all or some of the fragmented identities may take the form of possessing spirits, deities,
demons, animals, or mythical figures. Acculturation or prolonged intercultural contact may shape
the presentation of the other identities (e.g., identities in India may speak English exclusively and
wear Western clothes). Possession-form dissociative identity disorder can be distinguished from
culturally accepted possession states in that the former is involuntary, distressing, and
uncontrollable; involves conflict between the individual and his or her surrounding family,
social, or work milieu; and is manifested at times and in places that violate cultural or religious
norms. Combined dissociative-psychosis episodes may be more common in cultural contexts
with marked communal violence or oppression and limited opportunity for redress.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Women with dissociative identity disorder predominate in adult clinical settings but not in
child/adolescent clinical settings or in general population studies. Few differences in symptom
profiles, clinical history, and childhood trauma history have been found in comparisons between
men and women with dissociative identity disorder, except that women may have higher rates of
somatization.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Suicidal behavior is frequent. Over 70% of outpatients with dissociative identity disorder have
attempted suicide; multiple attempts are common, and other self-injurious and high-risk
behaviors are highly prevalent. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder have multiple
interacting risk factors for self-destructive and/or suicidal behavior. These include cumulative,
severe early- and later-life trauma; high rates of comorbid posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD),
depressive disorders, and substance use disorders; and personality disorder features. Dissociation
itself is an independent risk factor for multiple suicide attempts. Greater severity of dissociative
symptom scores is associated with a higher frequency of suicide attempts and nonsuicidal self-
injury among individuals with dissociative disorders.
Functional Consequences of Dissociative Identity Disorder
Some children and adolescents with dissociative identity disorder may function poorly in school
and in relationships. Others do well in school, experiencing it as a respite. In adults impairment
varies widely, from apparently minimal (e.g., in high-functioning professionals) to profound. The
symptoms of higher-functioning individuals may impair their relational, marital, family, and
parenting functions more than their occupational and professional life, although the latter also
may be affected. Many impaired individuals show improvement in occupational and personal
functioning over time, while some individuals with dissociative
