Dissociative amnesia.
Depersonalization/derealization disorder.
Major depressive disorder.
Bipolar disorders.
Posttraumatic stress disorder.
335
identity disorder may be impaired in most activities of living and function at the level of chronic
and persistent mental illness.
Differential Diagnosis
Both dissociative identity disorder and dissociative amnesia are
characterized by gaps in the recall of everyday events, important personal information, or
traumatic events that are inconsistent with ordinary forgetting. Dissociative identity disorder is
distinguished from dissociative amnesia by the additional presence of identity disruption
characterized by two or more distinct personality states.
The essential feature of depersonalization/derealization
disorder is persistent or recurrent episodes of depersonalization, derealization, or both.
Individuals with depersonalization/derealization disorder do not experience the presence of
personality/identity states with alterations of self and agency, nor do they typically report
dissociative amnesia.
Most individuals with dissociative identity disorder endorse a lifelong
negative posttraumatic emotional state, often with childhood onset, and their symptoms may
appear to meet the criteria for a major depressive episode. Moreover, posttraumatic reactivity to
times of year when trauma occurred (anniversary reactions), primarily manifesting with more
despondency, distress, and suicidal ideation, may also appear to be major depressive disorder,
with seasonal pattern. However, individuals with major depressive disorder or persistent
depressive disorder do not experience dissociative fluctuations in self and agency and
dissociative amnesia. It is important to assess if all or most identity states are experiencing the
adverse mood state, since mood disorder symptoms may fluctuate because they are experienced
in some identity states, but not others.
Dissociative identity disorder is commonly misdiagnosed as bipolar disorder,
typically bipolar II disorder, with mixed features. The relatively rapid shifts in behavioral state in
individuals with dissociative identity disorder—usually within minutes or hours—are atypical for
even the most rapid-cycling individuals with bipolar disorders. These state alterations are due to
rapidly shifting dissociative states and/or fluctuating posttraumatic intrusions. Sometimes these
shifts are accompanied by rapid changes in levels of activation, but these usually last minutes to
hours, not days, and are associated with activation of specific identity states. Elevated or
depressed mood may be experienced as loculated in specific identities, through
overlap/interference phenomena. Usually, the individual with dissociative identity disorder does
not have a classic bipolar sleep disturbance (e.g., reduced need for sleep), instead suffering from
chronic, severe nightmares and nocturnal flashbacks that interrupt sleep.
A majority of individuals with dissociative identity disorder will
have symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria for comorbid PTSD. Dissociative symptoms
characteristic of dissociative identity disorder should be differentiated from the dissociative
amnesia, dissociative flashbacks, and depersonalization/derealization characteristic of acute
stress disorder, PTSD, or the dissociative subtype of PTSD. Dissociative amnesia in PTSD
typically manifests only for specific traumatic events or aspects of traumatic events, as opposed
