Schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders.
Substance/medication-induced disorders.
Personality disorders.
to the chronic, complex dissociative amnesia characteristic of dissociative identity disorder.
Depersonalization/derealization symptoms in the dissociative subtype of PTSD are related to
specific posttraumatic reminders. Depersonalization/derealization symptoms in dissociative
identity disorder may occur not only in response to posttraumatic reminders, but also in an
ongoing fashion in daily life, including in response to stressful interpersonal interactions and
when there is overlap/interference between states.
Individuals with dissociative identity disorder may
experience symptoms that can superficially appear similar to those of psychotic
336
disorders. These include auditory hallucinations and symptoms characteristic of intrusions of
personality states into the individual’s awareness; these symptoms can seemingly resemble some
of the Schneiderian first-rank symptoms formerly considered indicative of schizophrenia (e.g.,
thought broadcasting, thought insertion, thought withdrawal, hearing voices keeping up a
running commentary about the individual). For example, hearing different personality states
discussing the individual can resemble auditory hallucinations of voices arguing in
schizophrenia. The individual with dissociative identity disorder may also experience the
thoughts or emotions of an intruding personality state, which can resemble thought insertion in
schizophrenia, as well as experience the sudden disappearance of these thoughts or emotions,
which can resemble thought withdrawal. Such experiences in an individual with schizophrenia
are usually accompanied by delusional beliefs about the cause of those symptoms (i.e., thoughts
being inserted by an outside force), whereas individuals with dissociative identity disorder
typically experience these symptoms as ego-alien and frightening. Individuals with dissociative
identity disorder may also report a range of visual, tactile, olfactory, gustatory, and somatic
hallucinations, which are usually related to autohypnotic, posttraumatic, and dissociative factors,
such as partial flashbacks, in contrast to individuals with schizophrenia, whose hallucinations are
primarily auditory and less commonly visual. Dissociative identity disorder and psychotic
disorders are therefore distinguished by symptoms characteristic of one of these conditions and
not the other (e.g., dissociative amnesia in dissociative identity disorder and not in psychotic
disorders). Finally, individuals with schizophrenia have low hypnotic capacity, whereas
individuals with dissociative identity disorder have the highest hypnotic capacity among all
clinical groups.
Individuals with dissociative identity disorder frequently
have a current or past history of substance use disorders. Symptoms associated with the
physiological effects of a substance (e.g., blackouts) should be distinguished from dissociative
amnesia in dissociative identity disorder if the substance in question is judged to be etiologically
related to the memory loss.
Individuals with dissociative identity disorder often present identities that
appear to encapsulate a variety of severe personality disorder features, suggesting a differential
diagnosis of personality disorder, especially of the borderline type. Importantly, however, the
individual’s longitudinal variability in personality style (attributable to inconsistency among
identities) differs from the pervasive and persistent dysfunction in affect management and
interpersonal relationships typical of those with personality disorders.
