Posttraumatic amnesia due to brain injury.
Functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder).
Factitious disorder and malingering.
Both dissociative identity disorder and traumatic brain
injury (TBI) are characterized by gaps in memory. Other characteristics of TBI include loss of
consciousness, disorientation and confusion, or, in more severe cases, neurological signs and
symptoms. A neurocognitive disorder due to TBI manifests either immediately after brain injury
occurs or immediately after the individual recovers consciousness after the injury, and persists
past the acute postinjury period. The cognitive presentation of a neurocognitive disorder
following TBI is variable and includes difficulties in the domains of complex attention, executive
function, and learning and memory, as well as slowed speed of information processing and
disturbances in social cognition. While depersonalization is not uncommon following TBI, the
additional neurocognitive features noted above help distinguish it from dissociative amnesia that
is part of dissociative identity disorder. Moreover, dissociative amnesia occurring in the context
of dissociative identity disorder is accompanied by a marked discontinuity in sense of self and
sense of agency, which are not features of TBI.
Functional neurological symptom
disorder may be distinguished from dissociative identity disorder by the absence of identity
alteration characterized by two or more distinct personality states or an
337
experience of possession. Dissociative amnesia in functional neurological symptom disorder is
more limited and circumscribed (e.g., amnesia for a nonepileptic seizure).
Individuals who feign dissociative identity disorder usually do
not report the subtle symptoms of intrusion characteristic of the disorder; instead they tend to
overreport media-based symptoms of the disorder, such as dramatic dissociative amnesia and
melodramatic switching behaviors, while underreporting less-publicized comorbid symptoms,
such as depression. Individuals who feign dissociative identity disorder tend to be relatively
undisturbed by or may even seem to enjoy “having” the disorder, or may ask clinicians to “find”
traumatic memories. In contrast, most individuals with genuine dissociative identity disorder are
ashamed of and overwhelmed by their symptoms, deny the diagnosis, underreport their
symptoms, and display minimization and avoidance of their trauma history.
Individuals who feign the symptoms of dissociative identity disorder usually create limited,
stereotyped alternate identities, with feigned amnesia related only to the events for which gain is
sought, with apparent switching behaviors and amnesia only displayed while being observed.
They may present an “all-good” identity and an “all-bad” identity in hopes of gaining
exculpation for a crime.
Comorbidity
Disorders that are comorbid with dissociative identity disorder include PTSD, depressive
disorders, substance-related disorders, feeding and eating disorders, obsessive-compulsive
disorder, antisocial personality disorder, and other specified personality disorder with avoidant,
obsessive-compulsive, or borderline personality traits. The most common forms of functional
neurological symptom disorder include nonepileptic seizures, gait disturbances, and paralyses.
Most commonly, nonepileptic seizures resemble grand mal seizures or complex partial seizures
with temporal lobe foci; others may mimic absence or partial seizures.
