F44.0
Dissociative Amnesia
Diagnostic Criteria
A. An inability to recall important autobiographical information, usually of a
traumatic or stressful nature, that is inconsistent with ordinary forgetting.
Note: Dissociative amnesia most often consists of localized or selective amnesia
for a specific event or events; or generalized amnesia for identity and life history.
B. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., alcohol or other drug of abuse, a medication) or a neurological or other
medical condition (e.g., partial complex seizures, transient global amnesia,
sequelae of a closed head injury/traumatic brain injury, other neurological
condition).
D. The disturbance is not better explained by dissociative identity disorder,
posttraumatic stress disorder, acute stress disorder, somatic symptom disorder,
or major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
Coding note: The code for dissociative amnesia without dissociative fugue is F44.0.
The code for dissociative amnesia with dissociative fugue is F44.1.
Specify if:
F44.1 With dissociative fugue: Apparently purposeful travel or bewildered
wandering that is associated with amnesia for identity or for other important
autobiographical information.
338
Specifiers
The specifier “with dissociative fugue” applies when dissociative amnesia occurs in the context
of a dissociative fugue, which is characterized by apparently purposeful travel or bewildered
wandering that is associated with amnesia for identity or other important autobiographical
information.
Diagnostic Features
The defining characteristic of dissociative amnesia is an inability to recall important
autobiographical information that 1) should be successfully stored in memory and 2) ordinarily
would be freely recollected (Criterion A). Dissociative amnesia is conceptualized as a potentially
reversible memory retrieval deficit. In this way, among others, it differs from the amnesias
attributable to neurobiological damage or toxicity that impair memory storage or retrieval.
A variety of types of dissociative amnesia may manifest. In general, the memory deficit in
