dissociative amnesia is retrograde and, except in rare cases, is not associated with ongoing
amnesia for contemporary life events. Retrospective memory impairments include not only lost
memories of traumatic experiences but also lost memories of everyday life during which no
trauma occurred. Most commonly, individuals with dissociative amnesia report localized
amnesia—a failure to recall events during a circumscribed period of time; and/or selective
amnesia—the individual can recall some, but not all, of the events during a circumscribed period
of time. In systematized amnesia the individual fails to recall a specific category of important
information (e.g., fragmentary recall of home growing up, but continuous memory for school; no
recall of a violent older sibling; lack of recall of a specific room in the individual’s childhood
home). Individuals rarely overtly complain of symptoms of these forms of dissociative amnesia
and attempt to minimize and rationalize the memory loss.
Generalized dissociative amnesia involves a complete loss of memory for most or all of the
individual’s life history. Individuals with generalized amnesia may forget personal identity (e.g.,
a woman loses memory of her entire life history after giving in to repeated pressure from a close
friend to engage in a sexual relationship), lose previous knowledge about the world (e.g., recent
political events, how to use current technology), and less commonly lack access to well-learned
skills (e.g., what contact lenses are and how to put them in). Generalized dissociative amnesia
has an acute onset; the perplexity, disorientation, and purposeless wandering of individuals with
generalized amnesia usually bring them to the attention of the police or psychiatric emergency
services. Dissociative fugue is commonly associated with generalized dissociative amnesia and
can be indicated by using the “with dissociative fugue” specifier. Generalized dissociative
amnesia may be more common among combat veterans, sexual assault victims, and individuals
experiencing extreme emotional stress or conflict. In continuous amnesia (i.e., anterograde
dissociative amnesia), an individual forgets each new event as it occurs.
Individuals with dissociative amnesia are frequently unaware (or only partially aware) of
their memory problems. They may recall some traumatic events, or parts of traumatic events, but
not others of the same type. Many, especially those with localized amnesia, minimize the
importance of their memory loss and may become uncomfortable when prompted to address it.
Associated Features
Many individuals with dissociative amnesia are chronically impaired in their ability to form and
sustain satisfactory relationships. Histories of trauma, especially child abuse, and victimization
are common. Some individuals with dissociative amnesia report dissociative flashbacks (i.e.,
behavioral reexperiencing of traumatic events). Many have a history of
339
nonsuicidal self-injury, suicide attempts, and other high-risk behaviors. Depressive and
functional neurological symptoms are common, as are depersonalization, auto-hypnotic
symptoms, and high hypnotizability. Sexual dysfunctions are common. Mild traumatic brain
injury (TBI) may precede dissociative amnesia.
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence for dissociative amnesia among adults in a small U.S. community
