Environmental.
study was 1.8%.
Development and Course
Dissociative amnesia has been observed in young children, adolescents, adults, and geriatric
populations. Amnesia in children younger than 12 may be the most difficult to evaluate because
they often have difficulty understanding questions about amnesia, and interviewers may find it
difficult to formulate child-friendly questions about memory and amnesia, especially in younger
children. Observations of apparent dissociative amnesia are often difficult to differentiate from
inattention, absorption, daydreaming, anxiety, oppositional behavior, and learning disorders.
Reports from several different sources (e.g., teacher, therapist, case worker) may be needed to
diagnose amnesia in children. Some traumatized adolescents with dissociative amnesia are less
likely to come to clinical attention because of lower levels of posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) intrusive symptoms and less externalizing behavior. Dissociative fugue behavior in
children and adolescents may be limited by the child’s life space (e.g., a child in a fugue “coming
to” after bicycling to an unfamiliar neighborhood, a teenager finding herself having taken public
transportation to a nearby town).
Onset of generalized amnesia is usually sudden. Individuals may experience multiple
episodes of this type of dissociative amnesia. A single episode may predispose to future
episodes. In between episodes of amnesia, the individual may or may not appear to be acutely
symptomatic. Some episodes of acute generalized amnesia resolve rapidly (e.g., when the
individual is removed from combat or some other stressful situation, and/or is brought to clinical
attention). A substantial subgroup of individuals develop highly impairing, debilitating, chronic
autobiographical memory deficits, such that even “relearning” their life history does not
ameliorate the memory loss.
Removal from the traumatic circumstances generating acute, generalized dissociative
amnesia (e.g., combat) may bring about a rapid return of memory. The memory loss of
individuals with dissociative fugue may be particularly refractory. Later life trauma, life stresses,
or losses may precede breakdown of long-standing autobiographical memory deficits related to
childhood or adult trauma, with the onset of acute PTSD, mood disorders, substance abuse, and
dangerousness to self or others, among other symptoms.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Severe, acute, or chronic traumatization is the main risk factor for dissociative
amnesia. Cumulative early life trauma and adversities, especially physical and sexual abuse, are
the major risk factors for dissociative amnesia for childhood and adolescence. More severe
sexual abuse, multiple episodes of childhood sexual abuse, and sexual abuse by a relative,
especially with betrayal by a close attachment figure, may increase the extent of childhood
autobiographical memory disturbances. Individuals with dissociative amnesia may deny recall of
specific childhood traumas (e.g., sexual assault), even those documented in medical or social
service reports, although the individual can recall other similar traumatic events, both before and
after the amnestic event. Severe cumulative adult trauma (e.g., repeated combat, trafficking,
prisoner-of-war or concentration camp
340
