Genetic and physiological.
experiences) also may result in extensive localized, selective, and/or systematized dissociative
amnesia. Generalized dissociative amnesia may be more common among individuals who have
recently experienced extreme acute traumas (e.g., brutal military combat, rape, torture, often in
the context of inability to escape) and/or a prior history of major social dislocation, asylum-
seeking, or refugee status. Others develop generalized amnesia in the context of profound
psychological conflict from which the individual also feels unable to escape. Virtually all
individuals who develop generalized dissociative amnesia in the context of psychological
conflict report past histories of severe early life and/or adult traumatization. Extreme acute
traumatic experiences also may engender major psychological conflicts (e.g., a woman develops
generalized amnesia after experiencing a brutal rape resulting in an unwanted pregnancy and
becomes suicidal; on assessment, she reveals that her religion views abortion as murder and
suicide as a major sin).
Quantitative genetic studies suggest that genetics account for about
50% of the interindividual variance in dissociative symptoms, with nonshared, stressful
environmental experiences accounting for most of the additional variance. Candidate gene
studies suggest a gene x environment interplay with earlier and more chronic childhood
traumatic experiences leading to significant increases in dissociative symptoms later in life.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
In cultural contexts where possession is part of normative religious or spiritual practice,
dissociative amnesia and fugue may be interpreted as resulting from pathological possession. In
contexts or situations where individuals feel highly constrained by social circumstances or
cultural traditions, the precipitants of dissociative amnesia often do not involve frank trauma.
Instead, the amnesia may be preceded by severe psychological stresses or conflicts (e.g., marital
conflict, other family disturbances, attachment problems, or conflicts attributable to restriction or
oppression).
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Suicidal and other self-destructive behaviors are common in individuals with dissociative
amnesia. The psychological forces producing generalized amnesia may be extreme, and suicidal
thoughts, impulses, plans, and behavior are a risk when amnesia decreases. Case reports suggest
that suicidal behavior may be a particular risk when the amnesia remits suddenly and
overwhelms the individual with intolerable memories.
Functional Consequences of Dissociative Amnesia
Impairments in individuals with dissociative amnesia resulting from childhood/adolescent
traumatization range from limited to severe. Some of these individuals may be chronically
impaired in their ability to form and sustain satisfactory attachments. Some may become highly
successful in occupational functioning but often do so by compulsive overwork. Individuals with
acute generalized dissociative amnesia usually have impairment in all aspects of functioning. A
substantial subgroup of individuals with generalized amnesia develop a highly impairing, chronic
autobiographical memory deficit that even relearning their life history does not ameliorate. These
individuals experience a highly debilitated, chronic course with poor overall functioning in most
