Dissociative identity disorder.
Posttraumatic stress disorder.
Neurocognitive disorders.
Substance-related disorders.
domains of life.
Differential Diagnosis
Recurrent episodes of dissociative amnesia may be attributable to
dissociative identity disorder. Individuals with dissociative amnesia may report depersonalization
and auto-hypnotic symptoms, as do individuals with dissociative
341
identity disorder. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder report pervasive discontinuities
in sense of self and agency, accompanied by many other dissociative symptoms. Amnesias in
dissociative identity disorder, in addition to retrospective autobiographical memory deficits,
include ongoing amnesia (“time loss”) for everyday events and interpersonal interactions;
finding unexplained possessions; perplexing major fluctuations in skills and knowledge; and
frequent, brief amnesic gaps during interpersonal interactions.
Some individuals with PTSD cannot recall part or all of a specific
traumatic event (e.g., a rape victim who cannot recall most events for the entire day of the rape).
When that amnesia extends to events beyond the immediate time of the trauma, a comorbid
diagnosis of dissociative amnesia may be warranted. Individuals with the dissociative subtype of
PTSD may also report dissociative amnesia in addition to depersonalization/derealization.
In major neurocognitive disorders, there is typically evidence of neural
tissue damage accompanied by a decline in cognitive function with deficits in attention,
executive function, learning and memory, language, and perceptual-motor and social cognition
that impair capacity for independent everyday activities. Memory loss for personal information is
usually embedded in cognitive, linguistic, affective, attentional, and behavioral disturbances.
Generally, awareness of personal identity is spared until late in the course of the neurocognitive
disorder. In neurocognitive disorders, retrograde amnesia is almost always accompanied by
anterograde amnesia. Anterograde dissociative amnesia can be confused with delirium. However,
medical, laboratory, toxicological, and neurological workups, including imaging studies, are
normal. Careful, repeated evaluations over time will show that as in other forms of dissociative
amnesia, there are no true neurocognitive deficits.
In the context of repeated intoxication with alcohol or other
substances/medications, there may be episodes of “blackouts” or periods for which the individual
has no memory, or partial memory (“grayouts”). To aid in distinguishing these episodes from
dissociative amnesia, a longitudinal history should show that the amnestic episodes occur only in
the context of intoxication. However, the distinction may be difficult when the individual with
dissociative amnesia also misuses alcohol or other substances, particularly in the context of
stressful situations that may also exacerbate dissociative symptoms. This can be a more complex
differential diagnosis when the substance use begins in childhood or adolescence, generally in
the context of intrafamilial abuse, neglect, and substance-related disorders. Sequential
observation of these individuals after detoxification, along with carefully taken history, usually
can distinguish the memory loss attributable to long-standing substance use from dissociative
amnesia. Some individuals with comorbid dissociative amnesia and substance use disorders will
attempt to minimize their dissociative amnesia and attribute memory problems solely to the
