Posttraumatic amnesia due to brain injury.
Seizure disorders.
Memory deficits associated with electroconvulsive therapy.
Catatonic stupor.
substance use. Prolonged use of alcohol or other substances may result in a substance-induced
neurocognitive disorder that may be associated with impaired cognitive function. However, in
this context the protracted history of substance use and the persistent deficits associated with the
neurocognitive disorder would serve to distinguish it from dissociative amnesia, where there is
typically no evidence of persistent impairment in intellectual functioning.
Amnesia may occur in the context of a TBI when there
has been an impact to the head or other mechanisms of rapid movement or displacement of the
brain within the skull. Other characteristics of TBI include loss of consciousness, disorientation
and confusion, or, in more severe cases, neurological signs and symptoms (e.g., abnormalities on
neuroimaging, a new onset of seizures or a marked worsening of a preexisting seizure disorder,
visual field cuts, anosmia). A neurocognitive disorder attributable to TBI must present either
immediately after brain injury occurs or immediately after the individual recovers consciousness
after the injury, and persist past the
342
acute postinjury period. The cognitive presentation of a neurocognitive disorder following TBI is
variable and includes difficulties in the domains of complex attention, executive function,
learning and memory, as well as slowed speed of information processing and disturbances in
social cognition. The patterns of memory deficits are typical of neurocognitive disorders. Mild
TBI may precede acute dissociative amnesia presentations, but the dissociative memory deficits
are out of proportion to the TBI head trauma and typically follow the dissociative, not the
neurocognitive, patterns.
Individuals with seizure disorders may exhibit complex behavior during
seizures or postictally with subsequent amnesia. Some individuals with a seizure disorder engage
in nonpurposive wandering that is limited to the period of seizure activity. Conversely, behavior
during a dissociative fugue is usually purposeful, complex, and goal-directed and may last for
days, weeks, or longer. Occasionally, individuals with a seizure disorder will report that some
autobiographical memories have been “wiped out” as the seizure disorder progresses. Such
memory loss is not associated with psychological trauma or adversities and appears to occur
randomly. In seizure disorders, serial electroencephalograms usually show abnormalities.
Telemetric electroencephalographic monitoring generally shows an association between the
episodes of amnesia and seizure activity. Dissociative and epileptic amnesias may coexist.
Memory deficits after electroconvulsive
therapy (ECT) most commonly occur for the day of ECT administration. More extensive
retrograde and even anterograde amnesia after ECT is usually unrelated to stressful or traumatic
life epochs, and generally remits after the ECT series concludes. ECT in severely depressed
individuals with dissociative disorders does not worsen dissociation, and memory access may
improve as depression remits.
Mutism in catatonic stupor may suggest dissociative amnesia, but failure of
recall is usually absent. Other catatonic symptoms (e.g., rigidity, posturing, negativism) are
usually present. Catatonic symptoms in children can be associated with trauma, abuse, and/or
deprivation. Unlike in dissociative amnesia, the pattern of memory loss in catatonia is only for
the catatonic episode.
