Acute dissociative reactions to stressful events (other specified dissociative disorder).
Factitious disorder and malingering.
Memory changes with aging or mild neurocognitive disorder.
The 
acute
dissociative reactions to stressful events example of other specified dissociative disorder is
characterized by a combination of dissociative symptoms that occur together acutely in response
to stressful events and typically last less than 1 month. Amnestic episodes that occur as part of
these reactions are accompanied by other prominent dissociative symptoms, have a short
duration (hours or days), and tend to be circumscribed to limited periods or events in a person’s
life (micro-amnesias).
There is no test, battery of tests, or set of procedures that
invariably distinguishes dissociative amnesia from feigned amnesia. Feigned amnesia is more
common in individuals with 1) acute, florid dissociative amnesia; 2) financial, sexual, or legal
problems; 3) a wish to escape stressful circumstances; 4) a desire to seem to be a more
interesting patient; and/or 5) a plan to engage in litigation for “recovered memories.” However,
dissociative amnesia can be associated with those same circumstances and can coexist with
deliberate feigning. Many individuals who malinger amnesia confess spontaneously or when
confronted.
Memory 
decrements 
in 
mild
neurocognitive disorder differ from those of dissociative amnesia; in mild neurocognitive
disorder, memory changes manifest as difficulty in learning and retaining new information. This
is often measured in tests of verbal learning of word lists or a brief story with evaluation of
immediate and delayed recall. With normal cognitive aging, individuals may also have similar
weaknesses in immediate and delayed recall of new information,
343
although normal aging may also affect information processing speed and other complex
executive function tasks in addition to memory.
Comorbidity
As is common in individuals with a history of trauma, many comorbidities co-occur with
dissociative amnesia, particularly as dissociative amnesia begins to remit. A wide variety of
affective phenomena may surface, including dysphoria, grief, rage, shame, guilt, and
psychological conflict and turmoil. Individuals may engage in nonsuicidal self-injury and other
high-risk behaviors. These individuals may have symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria for
persistent depressive disorder, major depressive disorder, or subthreshold depression (other
specified depressive disorder). Many individuals with dissociative amnesia develop PTSD at
some point during their life, especially when the traumatic antecedents of their amnesia are
brought into conscious awareness. Many of these individuals may show symptoms of the
dissociative subtype of PTSD. Many individuals with dissociative amnesia have symptoms that
meet diagnostic criteria for a comorbid somatic symptom and related disorder (and vice versa),
particularly functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder). Substance-related
and addictive disorders may be comorbid with dissociative amnesia, as well as feeding and
eating disorders and sexual dysfunctions. The most common comorbid personality disorder is
other specified personality disorder (with mixed personality disorder features), which often
includes avoidant, obsessive-compulsive, dependent, and borderline features.
