F48.1
Depersonalization/Derealization Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. The presence of persistent or recurrent experiences of depersonalization,
derealization, or both:
1. Depersonalization: Experiences of unreality, detachment, or being an
outside observer with respect to one’s thoughts, feelings, sensations, body, or
actions (e.g., perceptual alterations, distorted sense of time, unreal or absent
self, emotional and/or physical numbing).
2. Derealization: Experiences of unreality or detachment with respect to
surroundings (e.g., individuals or objects are experienced as unreal,
dreamlike, foggy, lifeless, or visually distorted).
B. During the depersonalization or derealization experiences, reality testing remains
intact.
C. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., a drug of abuse, medication) or another medical condition (e.g., seizures).
E. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder, such as
schizophrenia, panic disorder, major depressive disorder, acute stress disorder,
posttraumatic stress disorder, or another dissociative disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of depersonalization/derealization disorder are persistent or recurrent
episodes of depersonalization, derealization, or both. Episodes of depersonalization are
characterized by a feeling of unreality or detachment from, or unfamiliarity with, the individual’s
whole self or from aspects of the self (Criterion A1). The individual may feel detached from his
or her entire being (e.g., “I am no one,” “I have no self”). He or she may
344
also feel subjectively detached from aspects of the self, including feelings (e.g.,
hypoemotionality: “I know I have feelings, but I don’t feel them”), thoughts (e.g., “My thoughts
don’t feel like my own,” “head filled with cotton”), whole body or body parts, or sensations (e.g.,
touch, proprioception, hunger, thirst, libido). There may also be a diminished sense of agency
(e.g., feeling robotic, like an automaton; lacking control of speech or movements). The
depersonalization experience can sometimes be one of a split self, with one part observing and
one participating, known as an “out-of-body experience” in its most extreme form. The unitary
symptom of “depersonalization” consists of several symptom factors: anomalous body
experiences (i.e., unreality of the self and perceptual alterations); emotional or physical numbing;
