and temporal distortions with anomalous subjective recall.
Episodes of derealization are characterized by a feeling of unreality or detachment from, or
unfamiliarity with, the world, be it individuals, inanimate objects, or all surroundings (Criterion
A2). The individual may feel as if he or she were in a fog, dream, or bubble, or as if there were a
veil or a glass wall between the individual and the world around. Surroundings may be
experienced as artificial, colorless, or lifeless. Derealization is commonly accompanied by
subjective visual distortions, such as blurriness, heightened acuity, widened or narrowed visual
field, two-dimensionality or flatness, exaggerated three-dimensionality, or altered distance or
size of objects (i.e., macropsia or micropsia). Auditory distortions can also occur, whereby
voices or sounds are muted or heightened. In addition, Criterion C requires that the symptoms
cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning, and Criteria D and E describe exclusionary diagnoses.
Associated Features
Individuals with depersonalization/derealization disorder may have difficulty describing their
symptoms and may think they are “crazy” or “going crazy.” Another common experience is the
fear of irreversible brain damage. A commonly associated symptom is a subjectively altered
sense of time (i.e., too fast or too slow), as well as a subjective difficulty in vividly recalling past
memories and owning them as personal and emotional. Vague somatic symptoms, such as head
fullness, tingling, or lightheadedness, are not uncommon. Individuals may experience extreme
rumination or obsessional preoccupation (e.g., constantly obsessing about whether they really
exist, or checking their perceptions to determine whether they appear real). Varying degrees of
anxiety and depression are also common associated features. Individuals with the disorder have
been found to have physiological hyporeactivity to emotional stimuli. Neural substrates of
interest include the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis, inferior parietal lobule, and
prefrontal cortical-limbic circuits.
Prevalence
Transient depersonalization/derealization symptoms lasting hours to days are common in the
general population. The 12-month prevalence of depersonalization/derealization disorder is
thought to be markedly less than for transient symptoms, although precise estimates for the
disorder are unavailable. In general, approximately one-half of all adults have experienced at
least one lifetime episode of depersonalization/derealization. However, symptomatology that
meets full criteria for depersonalization/derealization disorder is markedly less common than
transient symptoms. One-month prevalence in the United Kingdom is approximately 1%–2%.
Development and Course
The mean age at onset of depersonalization/derealization disorder is 16 years, although the
disorder can start in early or middle childhood; a minority cannot recall ever not having had the
symptoms. Less than 20% of individuals experience onset after age 20 years and only 5% after
age 25 years. Onset in the fourth decade of life or later is highly unusual.
345
