Temperamental.
Environmental.
Onset can range from extremely sudden to gradual. Duration of depersonalization/derealization
disorder episodes can vary greatly, from brief (hours or days) to prolonged (weeks, months, or
years). Given the rarity of disorder onset after age 40 years, in such cases the individual should
be examined more closely for underlying medical conditions (e.g., brain lesions, seizure
disorders, sleep apnea). The course of the disorder is often persistent. About one-third of cases
involve discrete episodes; another third, continuous symptoms from the start; and still another
third, an initially episodic course that eventually becomes continuous.
While in some individuals the intensity of symptoms can wax and wane considerably, others
report an unwavering level of intensity that in extreme cases can be constantly present for years
or decades. Internal and external factors that affect symptom intensity vary between individuals,
yet some typical patterns are reported. Exacerbations can be triggered by stress, worsening mood
or anxiety symptoms, novel or overstimulating settings, and physical factors such as lighting or
lack of sleep.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Individuals with depersonalization/derealization disorder are characterized by
harm-avoidant temperament, immature defenses, and both disconnection and overconnection
schemata. Immature defenses such as idealization/devaluation, projection, and acting out result
in denial of reality and poor adaptation. Cognitive disconnection schemata reflect defectiveness
and emotional inhibition and subsume themes of abuse, neglect, and deprivation. Overconnection
schemata involve impaired autonomy with themes of dependency, vulnerability, and
incompetence.
There is a clear association between the disorder and childhood interpersonal
traumas in a substantial portion of individuals, although this association is not as prevalent or as
extreme in the nature of the traumas as in other dissociative disorders, such as dissociative
identity disorder. In particular, emotional abuse and emotional neglect have been most strongly
and consistently associated with the disorder. Other stressors can include physical abuse;
witnessing domestic violence; growing up with a seriously impaired, mentally ill parent; or
unexpected death or suicide of a family member or close friend. Sexual abuse is a much less
common antecedent but can be encountered. The most common proximal precipitants of the
disorder are severe stress (interpersonal, financial, occupational), depression, anxiety
(particularly panic attacks), and illicit drug use. Symptoms may be specifically induced by
substances 
such 
as 
tetrahydrocannabinol, 
hallucinogens, 
ketamine, 
MDMA 
(3,4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine; “ecstasy”), and salvia. Marijuana use may precipitate new-
onset panic attacks and depersonalization/derealization symptoms simultaneously.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Volitionally induced experiences of depersonalization/derealization can be a part of meditative
practices that are prevalent in many religious, spiritual, and cultural contexts and should not be
diagnosed as a disorder. However, there are individuals who initially induce these states
intentionally but over time lose control over them and may develop a fear and aversion for
related practices. Cultural frameworks may affect the level of distress or perceived severity
associated with uncontrolled depersonalization/derealization experiences by providing
explanations for them (e.g., spiritual/supernatural causes), which may alleviate individuals’ fears
