Illness anxiety disorder.
Major depressive disorder.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Other dissociative disorders.
Panic attacks.
that they are “losing their mind.”
Functional Consequences of Depersonalization/Derealization Disorder
Symptoms of depersonalization/derealization disorder are highly distressing and are associated
with major morbidity. The affectively flattened and robotic demeanor that these
346
individuals often demonstrate may appear incongruent with the extreme emotional pain reported
by those with the disorder. Impairment is often experienced in both interpersonal and
occupational spheres, largely as a result of the hypoemotionality with others, subjective difficulty
in focusing and retaining information, and a general sense of disconnectedness from life.
Differential Diagnosis
Although individuals with depersonalization/derealization disorder can
present with vague somatic complaints as well as fears of permanent brain damage, the diagnosis
of depersonalization/derealization disorder is characterized by the presence of a constellation of
typical depersonalization/derealization symptoms and the absence of other manifestations of
illness anxiety disorder.
Feelings of numbness, deadness, apathy, and being in a dream are not
uncommon in major depressive episodes. However, in depersonalization/derealization disorder,
such 
symptoms 
are 
associated 
with 
further 
symptoms 
of 
the 
disorder. 
If 
the
depersonalization/derealization clearly precedes the onset of a major depressive episode or
clearly continues after its resolution, the diagnosis of depersonalization/derealization disorder
applies.
Some individuals with depersonalization/derealization disorder
can become obsessively preoccupied with their subjective experience or develop rituals checking
on the status of their symptoms. However, other symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder
unrelated to depersonalization/derealization are not present.
In order to diagnose depersonalization/derealization disorder, the
symptoms should not occur in the context of another dissociative disorder, such as dissociative
identity disorder. Differentiation from dissociative amnesia and functional neurological symptom
disorder (conversion disorder) is simpler, as the symptoms of these disorders do not overlap with
those of depersonalization/derealization disorder.
Depersonalization/derealization is one of the symptoms of panic attacks,
increasingly 
common 
as 
panic 
attack 
severity 
increases. 
Therefore,
depersonalization/derealization disorder should not be diagnosed when the symptoms occur only
during panic attacks that are part of panic disorder, social anxiety disorder, or specific phobia. In
addition, it is not uncommon for depersonalization/derealization symptoms to first begin in the
context of new-onset panic attacks or as panic disorder progresses and worsens. In such
presentations, the diagnosis of depersonalization/derealization disorder can be made if 1) the
depersonalization/derealization component of the presentation is very prominent from the start,
clearly exceeding in duration and intensity the occurrence of actual panic attacks; or 2) the
