Psychotic disorders.
Substance/medication-induced disorders.
Traumatic brain injury.
Dissociative symptoms due to another medical condition.
depersonalization/derealization continues after panic disorder has remitted or has been
successfully treated.
The presence of intact reality testing specifically regarding the
depersonalization/derealization 
symptoms 
is 
essential 
to 
differentiating
depersonalization/derealization disorder from psychotic disorders. Rarely, positive-symptom
schizophrenia can pose a diagnostic challenge when nihilistic delusions are present. For example,
an individual may complain that he or she is dead or the world is not real; this could be either a
subjective experience that the individual knows is not true or a delusional conviction.
Depersonalization/derealization 
associated 
with 
the
physiological effects of substances during acute intoxication or withdrawal is not diagnosed as
depersonalization/derealization disorder. The most common precipitating substances are the
illicit drugs marijuana, hallucinogens, ketamine, ecstasy, and salvia. In
347
about 15% of all cases of depersonalization/derealization disorder, the symptoms are precipitated
by ingestion of such substances. If the symptoms persist for some time in the absence of any
further substance or medication use, the diagnosis of depersonalization/derealization disorder
applies. This diagnosis is usually easy to establish since the vast majority of individuals with this
presentation become highly phobic and aversive to the triggering substance and do not use it
again.
Depersonalization/derealization symptoms are typical in traumatic brain
injury (TBI) but are distinguished from depersonalization/derealization disorder by onset of
symptoms following TBI and the lack of other symptoms of depersonalization/derealization
disorder.
Features such as onset after age 40 years or
the presence of atypical symptoms and course in any individual suggest the possibility of an
underlying medical condition. In cases with dissociative symptoms, it is essential to conduct a
thorough medical and neurological evaluation, which may include standard laboratory studies,
viral titers, an electroencephalogram, vestibular testing, visual testing, sleep studies, and/or brain
imaging. When the suspicion of an underlying seizure disorder proves difficult to confirm, an
ambulatory electroencephalogram may be indicated; although temporal lobe epilepsy is most
commonly implicated, parietal and frontal lobe epilepsy may also be associated.
Comorbidity
In a convenience sample of adults recruited for a number of depersonalization research studies,
lifetime comorbidities were high for unipolar depressive disorder and for any anxiety disorder,
with a significant proportion of the sample having both disorders. Comorbidity with
posttraumatic stress disorder was low. The three most commonly co-occurring personality
disorders were avoidant, borderline, and obsessive-compulsive.
Other Specified Dissociative Disorder
