Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders
This chapter includes the diagnoses of somatic symptom disorder, illness anxiety disorder,
functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder), psychological factors affecting
other medical conditions, factitious disorder, other specified somatic symptom and related
disorder, and unspecified somatic symptom and related disorder. All of the disorders in this
chapter share a common feature: the prominence of somatic symptoms and/or illness anxiety
associated with significant distress and impairment. Individuals with disorders with prominent
somatic symptoms or illness anxiety are commonly encountered in primary care and other
medical settings but are less commonly encountered in psychiatric and other mental health
settings. These reconceptualized diagnoses, based on a reorganization of DSM-IV somatoform
disorder diagnoses, are more useful for primary care and other medical (nonpsychiatric)
clinicians.
The major diagnosis in this diagnostic class, somatic symptom disorder, emphasizes
diagnosis made on the basis of the presence of symptoms and signs (distressing somatic
symptoms plus abnormal thoughts, feelings, and behaviors in response to these symptoms) rather
than the absence of a medical explanation for somatic symptoms. A distinctive characteristic of
many individuals with somatic symptom disorder is not the somatic symptoms per se, but instead
the way they present and interpret them. Incorporating affective, cognitive, and behavioral
components into the criteria for somatic symptom disorder provides a more comprehensive and
accurate reflection of the true clinical picture than can be achieved by assessing the somatic
complaints alone.
The principles behind the changes in the somatic symptom and related diagnoses from DSM-
IV are crucial in understanding the DSM-5 diagnoses. The DSM-IV term somatoform disorders
was confusing and was replaced by somatic symptom and related disorders. In DSM-IV there
was a great deal of overlap across the somatoform disorders and a lack of clarity about the
boundaries of diagnoses. Although individuals with these disorders primarily present in medical
rather than mental health settings, nonpsychiatric physicians found the DSM-IV somatoform
diagnoses difficult to understand and use. The current DSM-5 classification recognizes this
overlap by reducing the total number of disorders as well as their subcategories.
The previous criteria overemphasized the centrality of symptoms being unexplained by
recognized pathophysiological processes. Such symptoms are present to various degrees,
particularly in functional neurological symptom disorder, but somatic symptom disorders can
also accompany recognized medical conditions (i.e., those disorders related to clearly recognized
pathophysiological processes). The reliability of determining that a somatic symptom is
unexplained by a recognized pathophysiological process related to a recognized medical
condition is limited, and grounding a diagnosis on the absence of an explanation is problematic
and reinforces mind-body dualism. It is not appropriate to give an individual a mental disorder
diagnosis solely because a recognized medical condition cannot be demonstrated. Furthermore,
