the presence of a recognized medical condition does not exclude the possibility of a comorbid
mental disorder, including a somatic symptom and related disorder. Perhaps because of the
predominant focus on lack of medical explanation in DSM-IV, individuals regarded these
diagnoses as pejorative and demeaning,
350
implying that their physical symptoms were not “real.” The DSM-5 classification defines the
major diagnosis, somatic symptom disorder, on the basis of positive symptoms (distressing
somatic symptoms plus abnormal thoughts, feelings, and behaviors in response to these
symptoms). In functional neurological symptom disorder and pseudocyesis (other specified
somatic symptom and related disorder), the emphasis is on demonstrating clinical evidence of
incompatibility with recognized pathophysiological processes.
It is important to note that some other mental disorders may initially manifest with primarily
somatic symptoms (e.g., major depressive disorder, panic disorder). Such diagnoses may account
for the somatic symptoms, or they may occur alongside one of the somatic symptom and related
disorders in this chapter. There is also considerable medical comorbidity among individuals with
somatic symptom and related disorders. Although somatic symptoms are frequently associated
with psychological distress and psychopathology, some somatic symptom and related disorders
can arise spontaneously, and their causes can remain obscure. Anxiety disorders and depressive
disorders may accompany somatic symptom and related disorders. The somatic component adds
severity and complexity to depressive and anxiety disorders and results in higher severity,
functional impairment, and even refractoriness to traditional treatments. In rare instances, the
degree of preoccupation may be so severe as to warrant consideration of a delusional disorder
diagnosis.
A number of factors may contribute to somatic symptom and related disorders. These include
genetic and biological vulnerability (e.g., increased sensitivity to pain), early traumatic
experiences (e.g., violence, abuse, deprivation), medical iatrogenesis (e.g., reinforcement of the
sick role, excessive referrals and diagnostic testing), and learning (e.g., lack of reinforcement of
nonsomatic expressions of distress), as well as sociocultural norms that minimize or stigmatize
psychological suffering as compared with physical suffering. Differences in medical care across
cultural contexts affect the presentation, recognition, and management of these somatic
presentations. Variations in symptom presentation are likely the result of the interaction of
multiple factors within cultural contexts that affect how individuals identify and classify bodily
sensations, perceive illness, and seek medical attention for them.
All of these disorders are characterized by the prominent focus on somatic concerns and their
initial presentation mainly in medical rather than mental health care settings. Somatic symptom
disorder and illness anxiety disorder offer more clinically useful methods of characterizing
individuals who may have been considered in the past for a diagnosis of somatization disorder
and hypochondriasis. Furthermore, approximately two-thirds to three-fourths of individuals
previously diagnosed with hypochondriasis are subsumed under the diagnosis of somatic
symptom disorder. However, the remaining one-quarter to one-third of individuals with
previously diagnosed hypochondriasis have high health anxiety in the absence of somatic
symptoms, and many such individuals’ symptoms would not qualify for an anxiety disorder
diagnosis. The DSM-5 diagnosis of illness anxiety disorder is for this latter group of individuals.
