F45.1
Illness anxiety disorder can be considered either a somatic symptom and related disorder or an
anxiety disorder. Because of the strong focus on somatic concerns, and because illness anxiety
disorder is most often encountered in medical settings, for utility it is listed with the somatic
symptom and related disorders. In functional neurological symptom disorder, the key to
diagnosis is neurological symptoms that can be demonstrated, on the basis of positive clinical
examination features, to be incompatible with recognized pathophysiology. This is now a “rule-
in” diagnosis, and not a diagnosis of exclusion, and can be made in the presence of a recognized
neurological disorder. It no longer requires the presence of a recent psychological stressor,
because such stressors are not always present. Psychological factors affecting other medical
conditions is also included in this chapter. Its essential feature is the presence of one or more
clinically significant psychological or behavioral factors that adversely affect a medical condition
by increasing the risk for suffering, death, or disability. Like the other somatic symptom and
related disorders, factitious disorder embodies persistent problems related to illness perception
and identity. In the great majority of reported cases of factitious disorder, both
351
imposed on self and imposed on another, individuals present with somatic symptoms and
expressed medical disease conviction. Consequently, DSM-5 factitious disorder is included
among the somatic symptom and related disorders. Other specified somatic symptom and related
disorder and unspecified somatic symptom and related disorder include conditions for which
some, but not all, of the criteria for somatic symptom disorder or illness anxiety disorder are met,
as well as pseudocyesis.
Somatic Symptom Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. One or more somatic symptoms that are distressing or result in significant
disruption of daily life.
B. Excessive thoughts, feelings, or behaviors related to the somatic symptoms or
associated health concerns as manifested by at least one of the following:
1. Disproportionate and persistent thoughts about the seriousness of one’s
symptoms.
2. Persistently high level of anxiety about health or symptoms.
3. Excessive time and energy devoted to these symptoms or health concerns.
C. Although any one somatic symptom may not be continuously present, the state
of being symptomatic is persistent (typically more than 6 months).
Specify if:
With predominant pain (previously pain disorder): This specifier is for
individuals whose somatic symptoms predominantly involve pain.
