Specify if:
Persistent: A persistent course is characterized by severe symptoms, marked
impairment, and long duration (more than 6 months).
Specify current severity:
Mild: Only one of the symptoms specified in Criterion B is fulfilled.
Moderate: Two or more of the symptoms specified in Criterion B are fulfilled.
Severe: Two or more of the symptoms specified in Criterion B are fulfilled, plus
there are multiple somatic complaints (or one very severe somatic symptom).
Diagnostic Features
Individuals with somatic symptom disorder typically have multiple, current, somatic symptoms
that are distressing or result in significant disruption of daily life (Criterion A), although
sometimes only one severe symptom, most commonly pain, is present. Symptoms may be
specific (e.g., localized pain) or relatively nonspecific (e.g., fatigue). The symptoms sometimes
represent normal bodily sensations or discomfort that does not generally signify serious disease.
Somatic symptoms without an evident medical explanation are not sufficient to make this
diagnosis. The individual’s suffering is authentic, whether or not it is medically explained.
The symptoms may or may not be associated with another medical condition. The diagnoses
of somatic symptom disorder and a concurrent medical illness are not mutually exclusive, and
these frequently occur together. For example, an individual may become seriously disabled by
symptoms of somatic symptom disorder after an uncomplicated myocardial infarction even if the
myocardial infarction itself did not result in any disability. If another medical condition or high
risk for developing one is present (e.g., strong family history), the thoughts, feelings, and
behaviors associated with this condition are excessive (Criterion B).
352
Individuals with somatic symptom disorder tend to have very high levels of worry about
illness (Criterion B). They appraise their bodily symptoms as unduly threatening, harmful, or
troublesome and often think the worst about their health. Even when there is evidence to the
contrary, some individuals still fear the medical seriousness of their symptoms. In severe somatic
symptom disorder, health concerns may assume a central role in the individual’s life, becoming a
feature of his or her identity and dominating interpersonal relationships.
Individuals typically experience distress that is principally focused on somatic symptoms and
their significance. When asked directly about their distress, some individuals describe it in
relation to other aspects of their lives, while others deny any source of distress other than the
somatic symptoms. Health-related quality of life is often impaired, both physically and mentally.
The diagnosis can further be specified by stating whether complaints predominantly involve pain
and/or if complaints are marked by a persistent course.
Additionally, severity of somatic symptom disorder can be specified by the number of
fulfilled B criteria. Mild forms of somatic symptom disorder (one symptom as specified in
Criterion B is fulfilled) are more prevalent, while moderate (two or more B criteria are present)
and severe cases (two or more symptoms as specified in Criterion B are fulfilled in combination
