with multiple somatic complaints or one very severe somatic symptom) are marked by higher
levels of impairment. In severe somatic symptom disorder, the impairment is marked, and when
persistent, the disorder can lead to invalidism.
There is often a high level of medical care utilization, which rarely alleviates the individual’s
concerns. Consequently, the individual may seek care from multiple doctors for the same
symptoms. These individuals often seem unresponsive to medical interventions, and new
interventions may only exacerbate the presenting symptoms. Some individuals with the disorder
seem unusually sensitive to medication side effects. Some feel that their medical assessment and
treatment have been inadequate.
The criteria for somatic symptom disorder appear suitable for use in children and
adolescents, but they have been less studied in youth than among adults.
Associated Features
Cognitive features include attention focused on somatic symptoms, attribution of normal bodily
sensations to physical illness (possibly with catastrophic interpretations), worry about illness, a
self-concept of bodily weakness, and intolerance of bodily complaints. Besides health anxiety,
emotional features may include negative affectivity, desperation, and demoralization related to
somatic symptoms. The relevant associated behavioral features may include repeated bodily
checking for abnormalities, repeated seeking of medical help and reassurance, and avoidance of
physical activity. These behavioral features are most pronounced in severe, persistent somatic
symptom disorder. These features are usually associated with frequent requests for medical help
for different somatic symptoms. This may lead to medical consultations in which individuals are
so focused on their concerns about somatic symptom(s) that they cannot be redirected to other
matters. Any reassurance by the doctor that the symptoms are not indicative of serious physical
illness tends to be short-lived and/or is experienced by the individuals as the doctor not taking
their symptoms with due seriousness. As the focus on somatic symptoms is a primary feature of
the disorder, individuals with somatic symptom disorder typically present to general medical
health services rather than mental health services. The suggestion of referral to a mental health
specialist may be met with surprise or even frank refusal by individuals with somatic symptom
disorder.
Prevalence
The prevalence of somatic symptom disorder is unclear. Estimates about the prevalence of
somatic symptom disorder come from the limited epidemiological literature on
353
DSM-IV-TR somatoform disorders. However, the prevalence of somatic symptom disorder is
expected to be higher than that of the more restrictive DSM-IV-TR somatization disorder (<1%)
but lower than that of undifferentiated somatoform disorder (approximately 19%). More recent
population-based studies with a questionnaire-based strategy using DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for
somatic symptom disorder in adult and adolescent samples report prevalence rates between 6.7%
and 17.4%. Based on research conducted in Europe and North America, the prevalence of
somatic symptom disorder in the general adult population can be approximated as 4%–6%.
