Temperamental.
Environmental.
Somatic symptom disorder has a higher frequency in primary care patients than in the general
population. Based on reviews and meta-analyses of studies from multiple countries that had still
used DSM-IV or ICD-10 criteria, a 12-month prevalence of somatic symptom disorder and
related conditions in primary care patients between 10% and 20% appears plausible. Prevalence
rates are higher in clinical settings that specialize in psychosomatic or functional disorders, with
reported frequencies of somatic symptom disorder between 40% and 60%.
Women tend to report more somatic symptoms than do men, and the prevalence of somatic
symptom disorder is consequently likely to be higher in women.
Development and Course
In a study of Danish children ages 5–7 years, functional somatic symptoms were common health
complaints, which for a significant minority (roughly one-fifth) of those with complaints were
severe enough to cause distress, impairment, school absences, or medical help-seeking. Age at
onset does not seem to affect the duration of untreated illness.
The course of somatic symptom disorder is likely to be chronic and fluctuating and
influenced by the number of symptoms, individual’s age, level of impairment, and any
comorbidity. The course is also influenced by personality traits, with less harm avoidance and
greater cooperativeness associated with a shorter time to remission.
In children, the most common symptoms are recurrent abdominal pain, headache, fatigue,
and nausea. A single prominent symptom is more common in children than in adults. When the
diagnosis is being made in younger individuals, it is important to obtain patient, family, and
other assessments (e.g., school) of symptom presentation. Patient and caregiver engagement
during evaluation and management is fundamental because parents’ interpretation of and
response to symptoms may determine the level of associated distress, the demands for medical
investigations and interventions, and time away from school.
In older individuals, pain localized in several body regions appears to be the most common
symptom. Somatic symptoms and concurrent medical illnesses are common as multimorbidity
increases with age. Prevalence rates of somatic symptom disorder seem to be stable until age 65
years and might decrease thereafter. For making the diagnosis in older individuals, a focus on the
requirement for excessive thoughts, feelings, or behaviors related to the somatic symptoms or
associated health concerns (Criterion B) is crucial. Somatic symptom disorder may be
underdiagnosed in older adults either because certain somatic symptoms (e.g., pain, fatigue) are
considered part of normal aging or because illness worry is considered “understandable” in older
adults who have more general medical illnesses and medications than do younger people.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
The personality trait of negative affectivity (neuroticism) has been identified as
an independent correlate/risk factor of a high number of somatic symptoms. Comorbid anxiety or
depression is common and may exacerbate symptoms and impairment.
354
Somatic symptom disorder is more frequent in individuals with few years of
education and low socioeconomic status, and in those who have recently experienced stressful or
