Course modifiers.
health-related life events. Early lifetime adversity such as childhood sexual abuse is also likely a
risk factor for somatic symptom disorder in adults.
Persistent somatic symptoms are associated with demographic features
(women, older age, fewer years of education, lower socioeconomic status, unemployment), a
reported history of sexual abuse or other childhood adversity, concurrent chronic physical illness
or mental disorder (depression, anxiety, persistent depressive disorder, panic), social stress, and
reinforcing social factors such as illness benefits. Total somatic symptom severity is probably
associated with female gender, anxiety, depression and general medical illness. Cognitive factors
that affect clinical course include sensitization to pain, heightened attention to bodily sensations,
and attribution of bodily symptoms to a possible medical illness rather than recognizing them as
a normal phenomenon or psychological stress.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
High numbers of somatic symptoms are found in population-based and primary care studies
around the world, with a similar pattern of the most commonly reported somatic symptoms,
impairment, and treatment seeking. The relationship between number of somatic symptoms and
illness worry is similar in different cultural contexts, and marked illness worry is associated with
impairment and greater treatment seeking cross-culturally. In many cultural contexts, individuals
with depression commonly present with somatic symptoms.
Despite these similarities, there are differences in somatic symptoms across cultural contexts
and ethnoracial groups. Sociocultural factors, particularly stigma related to mental disorders,
may explain differences in somatic symptom reporting across cultural contexts. The description
of somatic symptoms varies with linguistic and other local cultural factors. These somatic
presentations have been described as “idioms of distress” because somatic symptoms may have
special meanings and shape patient-clinician interactions in the particular cultural contexts. For
example, sensations of heaviness, complaints of “gas,” too much heat in the body, or burning in
the head are common in some cultures or ethnic groups but rare in others. Cultural explanations
also vary, and somatic symptoms may be attributed variously to particular family, work (e.g.,
burnout), or other environmental stresses; general medical illness; the suppression of feelings of
anger and resentment; or certain culturally specific attributions, such as semen loss. Certain
somatic symptoms may be part of specific explanatory models in a given cultural context; for
example, traditional understandings of shenjing shuairuo in China link concepts of “weakness of
nerves” (neurasthenia) and hot-cold imbalance with prominent symptoms such as fatigue and
low energy. There may also be differences in medical treatment seeking and utilization of
nonmedical, traditional, alternative and complementary healing practices among cultural groups,
in addition to differences due to variable access to medical care services. Cultural beliefs,
previous illnesses, insurance status, health literacy, and health care experiences can influence
individuals’ perception of somatic symptoms and health care use. Seeking treatment for multiple
somatic symptoms in general medical clinics is a worldwide phenomenon.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
In population-based studies, women report more somatic symptoms than men, and in one study
of primary care patients with chronic pain, women reported more severe somatic symptoms than
men. While exposure to sexual trauma, intimate partner violence, and a childhood trauma history
