Other medical conditions.
Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions.
is associated with increased somatic symptom expression in
355
both women and men, a childhood history of multiple adverse childhood experiences is
especially likely to increase somatic symptom expression in women.
In women, gender is associated with an increased likelihood of developing persistent
symptoms of somatic symptom disorder. There appears to be no evidence that gender is
associated with the duration of untreated illness and response to psychological or
pharmacological treatment.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Somatic symptom disorder is associated with suicidal thoughts and suicide attempts. It is likely
that suicidal thoughts and behaviors are partly explained by the diagnostic overlap and frequent
comorbidity of somatic symptom disorder and depressive disorders. In addition, dysfunctional
illness perceptions and the severity of somatic symptoms appear to be independently associated
with an increased risk of suicidal ideation.
Functional Consequences of Somatic Symptom Disorder
The disorder is associated with marked impairment of health status and high psychological
distress. Many individuals with severe somatic symptom disorder are likely to have impaired
health status scores more than 2 standard deviations below population norms. Health status is
particularly impaired in the presence of multiple or severe symptoms.
Differential Diagnosis
If the somatic symptoms are consistent with another mental disorder (e.g., panic disorder), and
the diagnostic criteria for that disorder are fulfilled, then that mental disorder should be
considered as an alternative or additional diagnosis. If, as commonly occurs, the criteria for both
somatic symptom disorder and another mental disorder diagnosis are fulfilled, then both should
be diagnosed, as both may require treatment.
The presence of somatic symptoms of unclear etiology is not in itself
sufficient to make the diagnosis of somatic symptom disorder. The symptoms of many
individuals with disorders like irritable bowel syndrome or fibromyalgia would not satisfy the
criterion necessary to diagnose somatic symptom disorder (Criterion B). Conversely, the
presence of somatic symptoms of an established medical condition (e.g., diabetes or heart
disease) does not exclude the diagnosis of somatic symptom disorder if the criteria are otherwise
met. Factors that distinguish individuals with somatic symptom disorder from individuals with
general medical conditions alone include the ineffectiveness of analgesics, a history of mental
disorders, unclear provocative or palliative factors, persistence without cessation, and stress.
The diagnosis of somatic symptom disorder
requires distressing or impairing somatic symptoms that may or may not be associated with
another medical condition but must be accompanied by excessive or disproportionate thoughts,
feelings, or behaviors related to the somatic symptoms or associated health concerns. In contrast,
