Panic disorder.
Generalized anxiety disorder.
Depressive disorders.
Illness anxiety disorder.
Functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder).
Delusional disorder.
Body dysmorphic disorder.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Factitious disorder and malingering.
the diagnosis of psychological factors affecting other medical conditions requires the presence of
a medical condition, as well as psychological factors that adversely affect its course or interfere
with its treatment.
In panic disorder, somatic symptoms and anxiety about health tend to occur in
acute episodes, whereas in somatic symptom disorder, anxiety and somatic symptoms are more
persistent.
Individuals with generalized anxiety disorder worry about multiple
events, situations, or activities, only one of which may involve their health. The main focus is not
usually somatic symptoms or fear of illness as it is in somatic symptom disorder.
356
Depressive disorders are commonly accompanied by somatic symptoms
such as fatigue, headaches, or joint, abdominal, or other pains. However, depressive disorders are
differentiated from somatic symptom disorder by the requirement of the presence of depressed
mood or, in the case of major depressive disorder, either depressed mood or decreased interest or
pleasure in activities. In some cultural contexts, these core symptoms of depression may be
initially denied or deemphasized by individuals whose presentations would otherwise meet
criteria for a depressive disorder. Such individuals might instead emphasize somatic symptoms
that may be idiomatic (e.g., heavy heart) and unfamiliar to clinicians.
If the individual has extensive worries about health but no or minimal
somatic symptoms, it may be more appropriate to consider illness anxiety disorder.
In functional neurological symptom
disorder, the presenting symptom is loss of function (e.g., of a limb), whereas in somatic
symptom disorder, the focus is on the distress that particular symptoms cause. The features listed
under Criterion B of somatic symptom disorder may be helpful in differentiating the two
disorders.
In somatic symptom disorder, the individual’s beliefs that somatic symptoms
might reflect serious underlying physical illness are not held with delusional intensity.
Nonetheless, the individual’s beliefs concerning the somatic symptoms can be firmly held. In
contrast, in delusional disorder, somatic type, the individual’s conviction that the somatic
symptoms are indicative of having a serious underlying illness is stronger than that found in
somatic symptom disorder.
In body dysmorphic disorder, the individual is excessively concerned
about, and preoccupied by, a perceived defect in his or her physical appearance. In contrast, in
somatic symptom disorder, the concern about somatic symptoms reflects fear of underlying
illness, not of a defect in appearance.
In somatic symptom disorder, the recurrent ideas about somatic
symptoms or illness are less intrusive, and individuals with this disorder do not exhibit the
associated repetitive behaviors aimed at reducing anxiety that occur in obsessive-compulsive
disorder.
In factitious disorder and malingering, individuals present
themselves as ill or impaired but have falsified presenting physical signs and symptoms with the
