F45.21
intent to deceive. In contrast, the symptoms of somatic symptom disorder are not simulated or
self-induced, and these individuals suffer authentically and seriously from their somatic
complaints.
Comorbidity
Somatic symptom disorder is associated with high rates of comorbidity with other mental
disorders as well as general medical conditions. The most relevant co-occurring mental disorders
are anxiety and depressive disorders, each of which occurs in up to 50% of cases of somatic
symptom disorders and significantly contributes to overall functional impairment and poorer
quality of life. Other mental disorders that have been found to co-occur with somatic symptom
disorder are posttraumatic stress disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Other evidence
indicates an association with sexual dysfunction in men.
Elevated levels of the psychological features (Criterion B) of somatic symptom disorder have
been found in several general medical conditions. When a concurrent general medical condition
is present, the degree of impairment is more marked than would be expected from the physical
illness alone. Moreover, somatization in medical illness has been shown to worsen disease and
treatment outcomes, adherence, and quality of life and to increase health care utilization.
357
Illness Anxiety Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Preoccupation with having or acquiring a serious illness.
B. Somatic symptoms are not present or, if present, are only mild in intensity. If
another medical condition is present or there is a high risk for developing a
medical condition (e.g., strong family history is present), the preoccupation is
clearly excessive or disproportionate.
C. There is a high level of anxiety about health, and the individual is easily alarmed
about personal health status.
D. The individual performs excessive health-related behaviors (e.g., repeatedly
checks his or her body for signs of illness) or exhibits maladaptive avoidance
(e.g., avoids doctor appointments and hospitals).
E. Illness preoccupation has been present for at least 6 months, but the specific
illness that is feared may change over that period of time.
F. The illness-related preoccupation is not better explained by another mental
disorder, such as somatic symptom disorder, panic disorder, generalized anxiety
disorder, body dysmorphic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, or
delusional disorder, somatic type.
Specify whether:
