Care-seeking type: Medical care, including physician visits or undergoing tests
and procedures, is frequently used.
Care-avoidant type: Medical care is rarely used.
Diagnostic Features
Most individuals who previously would have been diagnosed with hypochondriasis in DSM-IV
(preoccupation with having a serious disease based on the individual’s misinterpretation of
bodily symptoms) are now classified as having somatic symptom disorder; however, in one-third
of cases, the diagnosis of illness anxiety disorder applies instead.
Illness anxiety disorder entails a preoccupation with having or acquiring a serious,
undiagnosed medical illness (Criterion A). Somatic symptoms are not present or, if present, are
only mild in intensity (Criterion B). A thorough evaluation fails to identify a serious medical
condition that accounts for the individual’s concerns. While the concern may be derived from a
nonpathological physical sign or sensation, the individual’s distress emanates not primarily from
the physical complaint itself but rather from his or her anxiety about the meaning, significance,
or cause of the complaint (i.e., the suspected medical diagnosis). If a physical sign or symptom is
present, it is often a normal physiological sensation (e.g., orthostatic dizziness), a benign and
self-limited dysfunction (e.g., transient tinnitus), or a bodily discomfort not generally considered
indicative of disease (e.g., belching). If a diagnosable medical condition is present, the
individual’s anxiety and preoccupation are clearly excessive and disproportionate to the severity
of the condition (Criterion B). Most empirical evidence and existing literature pertain to
previously defined DSM hypochondriasis and health anxiety, and it is unclear to what extent and
how precisely they apply to the description of this new diagnosis.
The preoccupation with the idea that one is sick is accompanied by substantial anxiety about
health and disease (Criterion C). Individuals with illness anxiety disorder are easily alarmed
about illness, such as by hearing about someone else falling ill or reading a health-related news
story. Their concerns about undiagnosed disease do not respond to appropriate medical
reassurance, negative diagnostic tests, or benign course. The physician’s attempts at reassurance
and symptom palliation generally do not alleviate the individual’s
358
concerns and may heighten them. Illness concerns assume a prominent place in the
individual’s life, affecting daily activities, and may even result in invalidism. Illness becomes a
central feature of the individual’s identity and self-image, a frequent topic of social discourse,
and a characteristic response to stressful life events. Individuals with the disorder often examine
themselves repeatedly (e.g., examining one’s throat in the mirror) (Criterion D). They research
their suspected disease excessively (e.g., on the Internet) and repeatedly seek reassurance from
family, friends, or physicians. This incessant worrying often becomes frustrating for othe rs and
may result in considerable strain within the family. In some cases, the anxiety leads to
maladaptive avoidance of situations (e.g., visiting sick family members) or activities (e.g.,
exercise) that these individuals fear might jeopardize their health.
