Environmental.
Associated Features
Because they believe they are medically ill, individuals with illness anxiety disorder are
encountered far more frequently in medical than in mental health settings. The majority of
individuals with illness anxiety disorder have extensive yet unsatisfactory medical care. They
generally have elevated rates of utilization of medical and mental health services compared with
the general population. In a minority of cases of illness anxiety disorder, individuals are too
anxious to seek medical attention and avoid medical health care.
They often consult multiple physicians for the same problem and obtain repeatedly negative
diagnostic test results. At times, medical attention leads to a paradoxical exacerbation of anxiety
or to iatrogenic complications from diagnostic tests and procedures. Individuals with the disorder
are generally dissatisfied with their medical care and find it unhelpful, often feeling they are not
being taken seriously by physicians. At times, these concerns may be justified, since physicians
sometimes are dismissive or respond with frustration or hostility. This response can occasionally
result in a failure to diagnose a medical condition that is present.
Prevalence
Prevalence estimates of illness anxiety disorder are based on estimates of the DSM-III and DSM-
IV diagnosis hypochondriasis and health anxiety. The 1- to 2-year prevalence of health anxiety
and/or disease conviction in community surveys and population-based samples from high-
income countries such as the United States and Germany ranges from 1.3% to 10%. In
ambulatory medical populations, the 6-month/1-year prevalence rates are between 2.2% and 8%
across a range of countries, with weighted mean prevalence rates of 3%. By contrast, in a study
of patients in specialty clinics, about one-fifth of individuals reported illness anxiety. The
prevalence of the disorder is similar in men and women.
Development and Course
The development and course of illness anxiety disorder are unclear. Illness anxiety disorder is
generally thought to be a chronic, episodic, and relapsing condition with an age at onset in early
and middle adulthood. The disorder is thought to be rare in children, although the onset of
health-related anxieties can occur in childhood or adolescence. In some population-based
samples, health-related anxiety increases with age, but in others, health anxiety peaks in middle
age, before declining in older age. The ages of individuals with high health anxiety in medical
settings do not appear to differ from those of other individuals in those settings. In older
individuals, health-related anxiety often focuses on memory loss and sensory loss.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Illness anxiety disorder may sometimes be precipitated by a major life stress or a
serious but ultimately benign threat to the individual’s health. A history of
359
childhood abuse or of a serious childhood illness, serious illness in a parent, or death of an ill
parent during childhood may predispose to development of the disorder in adulthood.
