Course modifiers.
Other medical conditions.
Adjustment disorders.
Somatic symptom disorder.
Anxiety disorders.
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
Approximately one-third to one-half of individuals with illness anxiety
disorder have a transient form, which is associated with less psychiatric comorbidity, more
medical comorbidity, and less severe illness anxiety disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The diagnosis should be made with caution in individuals whose ideas about disease are
congruent with widely held cultural beliefs. The prevalence appears to be similar across different
countries, although little is known about the cross-cultural variation in phenomenology.
Functional Consequences of Illness Anxiety Disorder
Illness anxiety disorder causes substantial role impairment and decrements in physical function
and health-related quality of life. Health concerns often interfere with interpersonal relationships,
disrupt family life, and damage occupational performance.
Differential Diagnosis
The first differential diagnostic consideration is an underlying medical
condition, including neurological or endocrine conditions, occult malignancies, and other
diseases that affect multiple body systems. The presence of a medical condition does not rule out
the possibility of coexisting illness anxiety disorder. If a medical condition is present, the health-
related anxiety and disease concerns are clearly disproportionate to its seriousness. Transient
preoccupations related to a medical condition do not constitute illness anxiety disorder.
Health-related anxiety is a normal response to serious illness and is not a
mental disorder. Such nonpathological health anxiety is clearly related to the medical condition
and is typically time-limited. If the health anxiety is severe enough to cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in one or more important areas of functioning, an adjustment disorder
may be diagnosed. However, if disproportionate health-related anxiety persists for longer than 6
months, a diagnosis of illness anxiety disorder may apply.
Both somatic symptom disorder and illness anxiety disorder may be
characterized by a high level of anxiety about health and excessive health-related behaviors.
They are differentiated by the fact that somatic symptom disorder requires the presence of
somatic symptoms that are distressing or result in significant disruption of daily life, whereas in
illness anxiety disorder, somatic symptoms either are not present or, if present, are only mild in
intensity.
In generalized anxiety disorder, individuals worry about multiple events,
situations, or activities, only one of which may involve health. In panic disorder, the individual
may be concerned that the panic attacks reflect the presence of a medical illness; however,
although these individuals may have health anxiety, their anxiety is typically very acute and
episodic. In illness anxiety disorder, the health anxiety and fears are more persistent and
enduring. Individuals with illness anxiety disorder may experience panic attacks that are
triggered by their illness concerns.
Individuals with illness anxiety disorder may have
intrusive thoughts about having a disease and also may have associated compulsive behaviors
