Major depressive disorder.
Psychotic disorders.
(e.g., seeking reassurance). However, in illness anxiety disorder, the preoccupations are usually
focused on having a disease, whereas in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), the thoughts are
intrusive and are usually focused on fears of getting a disease in the future. Most individuals with
OCD have obsessions or compulsions
360
involving other concerns in addition to fears about contracting disease. In body dysmorphic
disorder, concerns are limited to the individual’s physical appearance, which is viewed as
defective or flawed.
Some individuals with a major depressive episode ruminate about their
health and worry excessively about illness. A separate diagnosis of illness anxiety disorder is not
made if these concerns occur only during major depressive episodes. However, if excessive
illness worry persists after remission of an episode of major depressive disorder, the diagnosis of
illness anxiety disorder should be considered.
Individuals with illness anxiety disorder are not delusional and can
acknowledge the possibility that the feared disease is not present. Their ideas do not attain the
rigidity and intensity seen in the somatic delusions occurring in psychotic disorders (e.g.,
schizophrenia; delusional disorder, somatic type; major depressive disorder, with psychotic
features). True somatic delusions are generally more bizarre (e.g., that an organ is rotting or
dead) than the concerns seen in illness anxiety disorder. The concerns seen in illness anxiety
disorder, though not founded in reality, are plausible.
Comorbidity
Illness anxiety disorder co-occurs with anxiety disorders (in particular, generalized anxiety
disorder and panic disorder), OCD, and depressive disorders. Approximately two-thirds of
individuals with illness anxiety disorder are likely to have at least one other comorbid major
mental disorder. Individuals with illness anxiety disorder may have an elevated risk for
personality disorders.
Functional Neurological Symptom Disorder (Conversion
Disorder)
Diagnostic Criteria
A. One or more symptoms of altered voluntary motor or sensory function.
B. Clinical findings provide evidence of incompatibility between the symptom and
recognized neurological or medical conditions.
C. The symptom or deficit is not better explained by another medical or mental
disorder.
D. The symptom or deficit causes clinically significant distress or impairment in
