social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning or warrants medical
evaluation.
Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on the symptom type (see below).
Specify symptom type:
F44.4 With weakness or paralysis
F44.4 With abnormal movement (e.g., tremor, dystonia, myoclonus, gait
disorder)
F44.4 With swallowing symptoms
F44.4 With speech symptom (e.g., dysphonia, slurred speech)
F44.5 With attacks or seizures
F44.6 With anesthesia or sensory loss
F44.6 With special sensory symptom (e.g., visual, olfactory, or hearing
disturbance)
F44.7 With mixed symptoms
Specify if:
Acute episode: Symptoms present for less than 6 months.
Persistent: Symptoms occurring for 6 months or more.
361
Specify if:
With psychological stressor (specify stressor)
Without psychological stressor
Diagnostic Features
In functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder), there may be one or more
neurological symptoms of various types. Motor symptoms include weakness or paralysis;
abnormal movements, such as tremor, jerks, or dystonic movements; and gait abnormalities.
Sensory symptoms include altered, reduced, or absent skin sensation, vision, or hearing.
Episodes of apparent unresponsiveness with or without limb movements may resemble epileptic
seizures, syncope, or coma (also called dissociative, psychogenic, or nonepileptic seizures or
attacks). Other symptoms include reduced or absent speech volume (dysphonia/aphonia); altered
speech articulation, prosody, or fluency; a sensation of a lump in the throat (globus); and
diplopia. This disorder has been called “conversion disorder” in prior editions of DSM as well as
in much of the psychiatric research literature. The term “conversion” originated in
psychoanalytic theory, which proposes that unconscious psychic conflict is “converted” into
physical symptoms.
The diagnosis rests on clinical findings that show clear evidence of incompatibility with
recognized neurological disease. These should usually be elicited and interpreted in the context
of the whole clinical picture by a health care professional with expertise in the diagnosis of
