neurological conditions. The diagnosis is not one of exclusion and can be made in individuals
who also have neurological diseases like epilepsy or multiple sclerosis. The diagnosis should not
be made simply because results from investigations are normal or because the symptom is
“bizarre.” Internal inconsistency during examination is one way to demonstrate incompatibility
(i.e., demonstrating that physical signs elicited through one examination method are no longer
present when tested a different way). There are dozens of examples of such “positive”
examination findings. Examples of examination findings that indicate incompatibility with
recognized neurological disease include the following:
For functional limb weakness or paralysis: Hoover’s sign, in which weakness of hip extension returns to normal strength
with contralateral hip flexion against resistance; the hip abductor sign, in which weakness of thigh abduction returns to
normal with contralateral hip abduction against resistance; or a discrepancy between on-the-bed performance (e.g., weakness
of ankle plantar flexion) compared with another task (e.g., ability to walk on tiptoes).
For functional tremor: the tremor entrainment test, in which a tremor changes when the individual is distracted by copying
the examiner in making a rhythmical movement with the contralateral hand or foot. The test is positive when the tremor
“entrains” the rhythm of the unaffected hand or foot, the tremor is suppressed, or the individual cannot copy simple
rhythmical movements. Other features of functional limb tremor include variability in frequency or direction of the tremor.
For functional dystonia: individuals typically present with fixed inverted position of the ankle, a clenched fist, or unilateral
contraction of platysma, often with sudden onset.
For attacks resembling epileptic seizures or syncope (also called functional or dissociative [nonepileptic] seizures): features
suggestive of functional neurological symptom disorder include persistent eye closure sometimes with resistance to opening,
bilateral motor movements with preserved awareness, or a duration longer than 5 minutes. Clinical features usually need to
be combined and may be supported with a normal simultaneous ictal electroencephalogram (although this alone does not
exclude all forms of epilepsy or syncope.
362
For functional speech symptoms: internal inconsistencies in speech articulation and phonation.
For functional visual symptoms: a tubular visual field (i.e., tunnel vision) and tests that indicate internal inconsistency in
visual acuity, such as the “fogging test” (i.e., while the individual views the eye chart with both eyes open, the “good” eye is
subtly fogged so that any useful binocular vision must be a result of “bad” eye function).
It is important to note that the diagnosis of functional neurological symptom disorder should
be based on the overall clinical picture and not on a single clinical finding.
Associated Features
Several associated features can support the diagnosis of functional neurological symptom
disorder, although none are specific. There may be a history of other functional somatic
symptoms or disorders, especially involving pain and fatigue. Onset may be associated with
stress or trauma, either psychological or physical in nature. The potential etiological relevance of
this stress or trauma may be suggested by a close temporal relationship. However, while
assessment for stress and trauma is important, it may be absent in up to 50% of individuals, and
the diagnosis should not be withheld if none is found.
Functional neurological symptom disorder is often associated with dissociative symptoms,
