Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Course modifiers.
such as depersonalization, derealization, and dissociative amnesia, particularly at symptom onset
or during attacks.
The phenomenon of la belle indifférence (i.e., lack of concern about the nature or
implications of the symptom) has been associated with functional neurological symptom
disorder, but it is not specific and should not be used to make the diagnosis. Similarly, the
concept of secondary gain (i.e., when individuals derive external benefits such as money or
release from responsibilities) is also not specific to functional neurological symptom disorder.
Prevalence
Transient functional neurological symptoms are common, but the precise prevalence of the
disorder is unknown. Based on research in the United States and northern Europe, the incidence
of individual persistent functional neurological symptoms is estimated to be 4–12/100,000 per
year. Prevalence in specialty clinics appears to be higher, although data are limited. For example,
5% of outpatients ages 9–17 in a Japanese psychiatric clinic and 6% of adult and adolescent
admissions to an inpatient psychiatric hospital in Oman received a diagnosis consistent with
functional neurological symptom disorder. In neurology clinics, around 5%–15% of individuals
have a diagnosis of functional neurological symptom disorder in studies from Scotland and
Australia.
Development and Course
Onset has been reported throughout the life course. The mean onset of nonepileptic attacks peaks
at ages 20–29 years, and motor symptoms have their mean onset at ages 30–39 years. The
symptoms can be transient or persistent. The prognosis may be better in younger children than in
adolescents and adults.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Maladaptive personality traits, especially emotional instability, are commonly
associated with functional neurological symptom disorder.
There may be a history of childhood abuse and neglect. Stressful life events
including physical injury are common but not universal triggering factors.
363
The presence of neurological disease that causes similar symptoms is a
risk factor (e.g., around one in five individuals with functional [nonepileptic] seizures also have
epilepsy).
Short duration of symptoms and agreement with the diagnosis are positive
prognostic factors. Maladaptive personality traits, the presence of comorbid physical disease, and
the receipt of disability benefits appear to be negative prognostic factors.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Episodes of unresponsiveness (including seizures) and motor symptoms are the most common
functional neurological symptoms across cultural contexts. High comorbidity between functional
