Recognized neurological disease.
Somatic symptom disorder.
Factitious disorder and malingering.
neurological and dissociative symptoms is common cross-culturally, especially in individuals
with nonepileptic seizures. Changes resembling functional neurological (and dissociative)
symptoms are common in certain culturally sanctioned rituals. If the symptoms are fully
explained within the particular cultural context and do not result in clinically significant distress
or disability, then the diagnosis of functional neurological symptom disorder is not made.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Functional neurological symptom disorder is two to three times more common in women for
most symptom presentations. One large clinical study found higher rates of cognitive impairment
and weakness in men and increased past sexual and physical trauma in women.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Cohort studies of functional neurological symptom disorder mostly show higher rates of suicidal
thoughts and attempts. Individuals with functional symptoms in a neurology clinic have a higher
rate of suicidal thoughts than individuals with recognized neurological disease. A study in
Turkey of 100 consecutive psychiatric outpatients with functional neurological symptom
disorder found that a history of suicide attempt was associated with risky use of alcohol, a
history of childhood maltreatment, and greater severity of dissociative symptoms as compared
with those who did not attempt suicide.
Functional Consequences of Functional Neurological Symptom
Disorder
Individuals with functional neurological symptom disorder may have substantial physical
disability. The severity of disability can be similar to that experienced by individuals with
comparable recognized medical conditions.
Differential Diagnosis
The main differential diagnosis is recognized neurological
disease that might better explain the symptoms. After a thorough neurological assessment, an
unexpected neurological disease cause for the symptoms is rarely found at follow-up. However,
reassessment may be required if the symptoms appear to be progressive. Functional neurological
symptom disorder commonly coexists with recognized neurological disease and may be part of
the prodromal state of some progressive neurological diseases.
Functional neurological symptom disorder may be diagnosed in
addition to somatic symptom disorder. Most of the somatic symptoms
364
encountered in somatic symptom disorder cannot be demonstrated to be clearly incompatible
with recognized neurological or medical disease, whereas in functional neurological symptom
disorder, such incompatibility is required for the diagnosis.
Functional neurological symptom disorder describes genuinely
experienced symptoms that are not intentionally produced (i.e., not feigned). However, definite
