Dissociative disorders.
Body dysmorphic disorder.
Depressive disorders.
Panic disorder.
F54
evidence of feigning (e.g., marked discrepancy between reported and observed activities of daily
living) would suggest malingering if the individual’s apparent aim is to obtain an obvious
external reward, or factitious disorder in the absence of such reward.
Dissociative symptoms are common in individuals with functional
neurological symptom disorder. If both functional neurological symptom disorder and a
dissociative disorder are present, both diagnoses should be made.
Individuals with body dysmorphic disorder are excessively concerned
about a perceived defect in their physical appearance but do not complain of symptoms of
sensory or motor functioning in the affected body part.
In depressive disorders, individuals may report general heaviness of their
limbs, whereas the weakness of functional neurological symptom disorder is more focal and
prominent. Depressive disorders are also differentiated by the presence of core depressive
symptoms.
Episodic neurological symptoms (e.g., tremor and paresthesia) can occur in both
functional neurological symptom disorder and panic attacks. In panic attacks, the neurological
symptoms are typically associated with characteristic cardiorespiratory symptoms and retained
awareness. Loss of awareness with amnesia for the attack occurs in functional seizures but not in
panic attacks.
Comorbidity
Anxiety disorders, especially panic disorder, and depressive disorders commonly co-occur with
functional neurological symptom disorder. Somatic symptom disorder may co-occur as well.
Personality disorders are more common in individuals with functional neurological symptom
disorder than in the general population. Neurological or other medical conditions commonly
coexist with functional neurological symptom disorder as well.
Psychological Factors Affecting Other Medical
Conditions
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A medical symptom or condition (other than a mental disorder) is present.
B. Psychological or behavioral factors adversely affect the medical condition in one
of the following ways:
1. The factors have influenced the course of the medical condition as shown by
a close temporal association between the psychological factors and the
development or exacerbation of, or delayed recovery from, the medical
condition.
2. The factors interfere with the treatment of the medical condition (e.g., poor
adherence).
