3. The factors constitute additional well-established health risks for the
individual.
365
4. The factors influence the underlying pathophysiology, precipitating or
exacerbating symptoms or necessitating medical attention.
C. The psychological and behavioral factors in Criterion B are not better explained
by another mental disorder (e.g., panic disorder, major depressive disorder,
posttraumatic stress disorder).
Specify current severity:
Mild: Increases medical risk (e.g., inconsistent adherence with antihypertension
treatment).
Moderate: Aggravates underlying medical condition (e.g., anxiety aggravating
asthma).
Severe: Results in medical hospitalization or emergency room visit.
Extreme: Results in severe, life-threatening risk (e.g., ignoring heart attack
symptoms).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of psychological factors affecting other medical conditions is the presence
of one or more clinically significant psychological or behavioral factors that adversely affect a
medical condition by increasing the risk for suffering, death, or disability (Criterion B). These
factors can adversely affect the medical condition by influencing its course or treatment, by
constituting an additional well-established health risk factor, or by influencing the underlying
pathophysiology to precipitate or exacerbate symptoms or to necessitate medical attention.
Psychological or behavioral factors include psychological distress, patterns of interpersonal
interaction, coping styles, and maladaptive health behaviors, such as denial of symptoms or poor
adherence to medical recommendations. Common clinical examples are anxiety-exacerbating
asthma, denial of need for treatment for acute chest pain, and manipulation of insulin by an
individual with diabetes wishing to lose weight. Many different psychological factors have been
demonstrated to adversely influence medical conditions—for example, symptoms of depression
or anxiety, stressful life events, relationship style, personality traits, and coping styles. The
adverse effects can range from acute, with immediate medical consequences (e.g., Takotsubo
cardiomyopathy), to chronic, occurring over a long period of time (e.g., chronic occupational
stress increasing risk for hypertension). Affected medical conditions can be those with clear
pathophysiology (e.g., diabetes, cancer, coronary disease), functional syndromes (e.g., migraine,
irritable bowel syndrome, fibromyalgia), or idiopathic medical symptoms (e.g., pain, fatigue,
dizziness).
This diagnosis should be reserved for situations in which the effect of the psychological
factor on the medical condition is evident and the psychological factor has clinically significant
effects on the course or outcome of the medical condition. Abnormal psychological or behavioral
