Mental disorder due to another medical condition.
symptoms that develop in response to a medical condition are more properly coded as an
adjustment disorder (a clinically significant psychological response to an identifiable stressor).
There must be reasonable evidence to suggest an association between the psychological factors
and the medical condition, although it may often not be possible to demonstrate direct causality
or the mechanisms underlying the relationship.
Prevalence
The prevalence of psychological factors affecting other medical conditions is unclear. In U.S.
private insurance billing data, it was a more common diagnosis than DSM-IV somatic symptom
disorders.
Development and Course
Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions can occur across the lifespan.
Particularly with young children, corroborative history from parents or school can assist the
366
diagnostic evaluation. Some conditions are characteristic of particular life stages (e.g., in older
individuals, the stress associated with acting as a caregiver for an ill spouse or partner).
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Many differences between cultural contexts may influence psychological factors and their effects
on medical conditions, such as those in language and communication style, idioms of distress,
explanatory models of illness, patterns of seeking health care, service availability and
organization, doctor-patient relationships and other healing practices, family and gender roles,
and attitudes toward pain and death. Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions
must be differentiated from culturally specific coping behaviors such as accessing faith, spiritual,
or traditional healers or other variations in illness management that are acceptable within cultural
contexts and represent an attempt to help heal the medical condition. These local practices may
complement rather than obstruct evidence-based interventions. Use of alternative healing
practices may delay use of medical services and affect outcomes, but when the intent of the
healing practice is to address the problem in a culturally sanctioned way, these practices should
not be pathologized as psychological factors affecting other medical conditions.
Functional Consequences of Psychological Factors Affecting Other
Medical Conditions
Psychological and behavioral factors have been demonstrated to affect the course of many
medical diseases.
Differential Diagnosis
A temporal association between symptoms of a
mental disorder and those of a medical condition is also characteristic of a mental disorder due to
another medical condition, but the presumed causality is in the opposite direction. In a mental
