Adjustment disorders.
Somatic symptom disorder.
Illness anxiety disorder.
disorder due to another medical condition, the medical condition is judged to be causing the
mental disorder through a direct physiological mechanism. In psychological factors affecting
other medical conditions, the psychological or behavioral factors are judged to affect the course
of the medical condition.
Abnormal psychological or behavioral symptoms that develop in response
to a medical condition are more properly coded as an adjustment disorder (a clinically significant
psychological response to an identifiable stressor). For example, an individual with angina that is
precipitated whenever he becomes enraged would be diagnosed as having psychological factors
affecting other medical conditions, whereas an individual with angina who developed
maladaptive anticipatory anxiety would be diagnosed as having an adjustment disorder with
anxiety. In clinical practice, however, psychological factors and a medical condition are often
mutually exacerbating (e.g., anxiety as both a precipitant and a consequence of angina), in which
case the distinction is arbitrary. Other mental disorders frequently result in medical
complications, most notably substance use disorders (e.g., alcohol use disorder, tobacco use
disorder). If an individual has a coexisting major mental disorder that adversely affects or causes
another medical condition, diagnoses of the mental disorder and the medical condition are
usually sufficient. Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions is diagnosed when
the psychological traits or behaviors do not meet criteria for a mental diagnosis.
Somatic symptom disorder is characterized by a combination of
distressing somatic symptoms and excessive or maladaptive thoughts, feelings, and behavior in
response to these symptoms or associated health concerns. The individual may or may not have a
diagnosable medical condition. In contrast, in psychological factors
367
affecting other medical conditions, the psychological factors adversely affect a medical
condition; the individual’s thoughts, feelings, and behavior are not necessarily excessive. The
difference is one of emphasis, rather than a clear-cut distinction. In psychological factors
affecting other medical conditions, the emphasis is on the exacerbation of the medical condition
(e.g., an individual with angina that is precipitated whenever he becomes anxious). In somatic
symptom disorder, the emphasis is on maladaptive thoughts, feelings, and behavior (e.g., an
individual with angina who worries constantly that she will have a heart attack, takes her blood
pressure multiple times per day, and restricts her activities).
Illness anxiety disorder is characterized by high illness anxiety that is
distressing and/or disruptive to daily life with minimal somatic symptoms. The focus of clinical
concern is the individual’s worry about having a disease; in most cases, no serious disease is
present. In psychological factors affecting other medical conditions, anxiety may be a relevant
psychological factor affecting a medical condition, but the clinical concern is the adverse effects
on the medical condition.
Comorbidity
By definition, the diagnosis of psychological factors affecting other medical conditions entails a
relevant psychological or behavioral syndrome or trait and a comorbid medical condition.
