The victim may be given an abuse diagnosis (e.g., T74.12X; see the chapter “Other Conditions
That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention”). If an individual with factitious disorder imposed on
another has also deceptively represented his or her own illness or injury, both factitious disorder
imposed on self and on another can be diagnosed.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of factitious disorder is the falsification of medical or psychological signs
and symptoms in the individual or others that are associated with the identified deception.
Individuals with factitious disorder can also seek treatment for themselves or another following
induction of injury or disease. The diagnosis requires demonstrating that the individual is taking
surreptitious actions to misrepresent, simulate, or cause signs or symptoms of illness or injury
even in the absence of obvious external rewards. The diagnosis of factitious disorder emphasizes
the objective identification of falsification of signs and symptoms of illness and not the
individual motivations of the falsifier. Methods of illness falsification can include exaggeration,
fabrication, simulation, and induction. While a preexisting medical condition may be present, the
deceptive behavior or induction of injury associated with deception causes others to view such
individuals (or, in the case of factitious disorder imposed on another, the victim) as more ill or
impaired, and this can lead to excessive clinical intervention. Individuals with factitious disorder
might, for example, report feelings of depression and suicidal thoughts or behavior following the
death of a spouse despite the death not being true or the individual’s not having a spouse;
deceptively report episodes of neurological symptoms (e.g., seizures, dizziness, or blacking out);
manipulate a laboratory test (e.g., by adding blood to urine) to falsely indicate an abnormality;
falsify medical records to indicate an illness; ingest a substance (e.g., insulin or warfarin) to
induce an abnormal laboratory result or illness; or physically injure themselves or induce illness
in themselves or another (e.g., by injecting fecal material to produce an abscess or to induce
sepsis). Although individuals with factitious disorder most often present to health care
professionals for treatment of their factitious symptoms, some individuals with factitious
disorder choose to mislead community members in person or online about illness or injury
without necessarily engaging health care professionals.
Associated Features
Individuals with factitious disorder imposed on self or factitious disorder imposed on another are
at risk for experiencing great psychological distress or functional impairment by causing harm to
themselves and others. Family, friends, faith leaders, and health care professionals are also often
adversely affected by their behavior (e.g., devoted time, attention, and resources to provide
medical care and emotional support to the falsifier). Individuals with factitious disorder imposed
on another sometimes falsely allege the presence of educational deficits or disabilities in their
children for which they demand special attention, often at considerable inconvenience to
education professionals.
Whereas some aspects of factitious disorders might represent criminal behavior (e.g.,
factitious disorder imposed on another, in which the parent’s actions represent abuse and
maltreatment of a child), such criminal behavior and mental illness are not mutually exclusive.
Moreover, such behaviors, including the induction of injury or disease, are associated with
deception.
