Deception to avoid legal liability.
Somatic symptom and related disorders.
Malingering.
Prevalence
The prevalence of factitious disorder is unknown, likely because of the role of deception in this
population. Further complicating efforts at determining prevalence is the fact that health care
professionals infrequently record the diagnosis, even in recognized cases.
369
Based on a study of general hospital inpatients in the United States referred for psychiatric
consultation, it is estimated that almost 1% have presentations that meet the criteria for factitious
disorder. Factitious disorder imposed on self or another appears to be encountered more
frequently in tertiary care settings than at primary care sites.
Development and Course
The course of factitious disorder is usually one of intermittent episodes. Single episodes and
episodes that are characterized as persistent and unremitting are both less common. Onset is
usually in early adulthood, often after hospitalization for a medical condition or a mental
disorder. When imposed on another, the disorder may begin after hospitalization of the
individual’s child or other dependent. In individuals with recurrent episodes of falsification of
signs and symptoms of illness and/or induction of injury, this pattern of successive deceptive
contact with medical personnel, including hospitalizations, may become lifelong.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
While the prevalence is not known, a pooled analysis of all case series and studies finds that two-
thirds of individuals with factitious disorder are women and one-third are men.
Differential Diagnosis
Caregivers who lie about abuse injuries in dependents solely to
protect themselves from liability are not diagnosed with factitious disorder imposed on another
because protection from liability is an external reward (Criterion C, the deceptive behavior is
evident even in the absence of obvious external rewards). Such caregivers who, upon
observation, analysis of medical records, and/or interviews with others, are found to lie more
extensively than needed for immediate self-protection are diagnosed with factitious disorder
imposed on another.
In somatic symptom disorder and the care-seeking type of
illness anxiety disorder, there may be excessive attention and treatment seeking for perceived
medical concerns, but there is no evidence that the individual is providing false information or
behaving deceptively.
Malingering is differentiated from factitious disorder by the intentional reporting of
symptoms for personal gain (e.g., money, time off work). In contrast, the diagnosis of factitious
disorder requires that the illness falsification is not fully accounted for by external rewards.
Factitious disorder and malingering are not mutually exclusive, however. The motives in any
single case might be multiple and shifting depending on the circumstances and reactions of
others.
