Functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder).
Borderline personality disorder.
Medical condition or mental disorder not associated with intentional symptom falsification.
Functional neurological symptom
disorder is characterized by neurological symptoms that are inconsistent with neurological
pathophysiology. Factitious disorder with neurological symptoms is distinguished from
functional neurological symptom disorder by evidence of deceptive falsification of symptoms.
Deliberate physical self-harm in the absence of suicidal intent can
also occur in association with other mental disorders such as borderline personality disorder.
Factitious disorder requires that the induction of injury occur in association with deception.
Presentation
of signs and symptoms of illness that do not conform to an identifiable medical condition or
mental disorder increases the likelihood of the presence of a factitious disorder. However, the
diagnosis of factitious disorder does not exclude the
370
presence of a true medical condition or mental disorder, as comorbid illness often occurs in the
individual along with factitious disorder. For example, individuals who might manipulate blood
sugar levels to produce symptoms may also have diabetes.
Other Specified Somatic Symptom and Related Disorder
F45.8
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a somatic
symptom and related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do
not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the somatic symptom and related
disorders diagnostic class.
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified”
designation include the following:
1. Brief somatic symptom disorder: Duration of symptoms is less than 6 months.
2. Brief illness anxiety disorder: Duration of symptoms is less than 6 months.
3. Illness anxiety disorder without excessive health-related behaviors or
maladaptive avoidance: Criterion D for illness anxiety disorder is not met.
4. Pseudocyesis: A false belief of being pregnant that is associated with objective
signs and reported symptoms of pregnancy.
Unspecified Somatic Symptom and Related Disorder
F45.9
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a somatic
