Feeding and Eating Disorders
Feeding and eating disorders are characterized by a persistent disturbance of
eating or eating-related behavior that results in the altered consumption or absorption of food and
that significantly impairs physical health or psychosocial functioning. Diagnostic criteria are
provided for pica, rumination disorder, avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder, anorexia
nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating disorder.
The diagnostic criteria for anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating disorder
result in a classification scheme that is mutually exclusive, so that during a single episode, only
one of these diagnoses can be assigned. The rationale for this approach is that, despite a number
of common psychological and behavioral features, the disorders differ substantially in clinical
course, outcome, and treatment needs.
Some individuals with disorders described in this chapter report eating-related symptoms
resembling those typically endorsed by individuals with substance use disorders, such as craving
and patterns of compulsive use. This resemblance may reflect the involvement of the same neural
systems, including those implicated in regulatory self-control and reward, in both groups of
disorders. However, the relative contributions of shared and distinct factors in the development
and perpetuation of eating and substance use disorders remain insufficiently understood.
Finally, obesity is not included in DSM-5 as a mental disorder. Obesity (excess body fat)
results from the long-term excess of energy intake relative to energy expenditure. A range of
genetic, physiological, behavioral, and environmental factors that vary across individuals
contributes to the development of obesity; thus, obesity is not considered a mental disorder.
However, there are robust associations between obesity and a number of mental disorders (e.g.,
binge-eating disorder, depressive and bipolar disorders, schizophrenia). The side effects of some
psychotropic medications contribute importantly to the development of obesity, and obesity may
be a risk factor for the development of some mental disorders (e.g., depressive disorders).
Pica
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Persistent eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances over a period of at least 1
month.
B. The eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances is inappropriate to the
developmental level of the individual.
C. The eating behavior is not part of a culturally supported or socially normative
practice.
