D. If the eating behavior occurs in the context of another mental disorder (e.g.,
intellectual developmental disorder [intellectual disability], autism spectrum
disorder, schizophrenia) or medical condition (including pregnancy), it is
sufficiently severe to warrant additional clinical attention.
372
Coding note: The ICD-10-CM codes for pica are F98.3 in children and F50.89 in
adults.
Specify if:
In remission: After full criteria for pica were previously met, the criteria have not
been met for a sustained period of time.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of pica is the eating of one or more nonnutritive, nonfood substances on a
persistent basis over a period of at least 1 month (Criterion A) that is severe enough to warrant
clinical attention. Typical substances ingested tend to vary with age and availability and might
include paper, soap, cloth, hair, string, wool, soil, chalk, talcum powder, paint, gum, metal,
pebbles, charcoal or coal, ash, clay, starch, or ice. The term nonfood is included because the
diagnosis of pica does not apply to ingestion of diet products that have minimal nutritional
content. There is typically no aversion to food in general. The eating of nonnutritive, nonfood
substances must be developmentally inappropriate (Criterion B) and not part of a culturally
supported or socially normative practice (Criterion C). A minimum age of 2 years is suggested
for a pica diagnosis to exclude developmentally normal mouthing of objects by infants that
results in ingestion. The eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances can be an associated feature
of other mental disorders (e.g., intellectual developmental disorder [intellectual disability],
autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia). If the eating behavior occurs exclusively in the context
of another mental disorder, a separate diagnosis of pica should be made only if the eating
behavior is sufficiently severe to warrant additional clinical attention (Criterion D).
Associated Features
Although deficiencies in vitamins or minerals (e.g., zinc, iron) have been reported, often no
specific biological abnormalities are found. In some cases, pica comes to clinical attention only
following general medical complications (e.g., mechanical bowel problems; intestinal
obstruction, such as that resulting from a bezoar; intestinal perforation; infections such as
toxoplasmosis and toxocariasis as a result of ingesting feces or dirt; poisoning, such as by
ingestion of lead-based paint).
Prevalence
Limited data suggest that the prevalence of pica is approximately 5% among school-age children.
Roughly one-third of pregnant women, especially those with food insecurity (i.e., without
reliable access to affordable and nutritious food), engage in pica. Conditions associated with pica
include lack of available food and vitamin deficiency.
