Environmental.
Development and Course
Onset of pica can occur in childhood, adolescence, or adulthood, although childhood onset is
most commonly reported. Pica can occur in otherwise normally developing children, whereas in
adults it appears more likely to occur in the context of intellectual developmental disorder or
other mental disorders. The course of the disorder can be protracted and can result in medical
emergencies (e.g., intestinal obstruction, acute weight loss, poisoning). The disorder can
potentially be fatal depending on substances ingested.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Neglect, lack of supervision, and developmental delay can increase the risk for
this condition.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
In some populations, the eating of earth or other seemingly nonnutritive substances is believed to
be of spiritual, medicinal, or other social value, or may be a culturally supported
373
or socially normative practice. Such behavior does not warrant a diagnosis of pica (Criterion C).
Pica behavior may be prevalent in some cultural groups, but it should not be assumed to be
socially normative without further evaluation.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Pica occurs in both genders. The eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances may manifest in
pregnancy, when specific cravings (e.g., chalk or ice) may occur. The diagnosis of pica during
pregnancy is appropriate only if such cravings lead to the ingestion of nonnutritive, nonfood
substances to the extent that the eating of these substances poses potential medical risks. A
worldwide meta-analysis showed the prevalence rate of pica to be 28% during pregnancy and/or
the postpartum period.
Diagnostic Markers
Abdominal flat plate radiography, ultrasound, and other scanning methods may reveal
obstructions related to pica. Blood tests and other laboratory tests can be used to ascertain levels
of poisoning or the nature of infection.
Functional Consequences of Pica
Pica can significantly impair physical functioning, but it is rarely the sole cause of impairment in
social functioning. Pica often occurs with other disorders associated with impaired social
functioning.
Differential Diagnosis
Eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances may occur during the course of other mental
