Anorexia nervosa.
Factitious disorder.
Nonsuicidal self-injury and nonsuicidal self-injury behaviors in personality disorders.
F98.21
disorders (e.g., autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia) and in Kleine-Levin syndrome. In any
such instance, an additional diagnosis of pica should be given only if the eating behavior is
sufficiently persistent and severe to warrant additional clinical attention.
Pica can usually be distinguished from the other feeding and eating disorders
by the consumption of nonnutritive, nonfood substances. It is important to note, however, that
some presentations of anorexia nervosa include ingestion of nonnutritive, nonfood substances,
such as paper tissues, as a means of attempting to control appetite. In such cases, when the eating
of nonnutritive, nonfood substances is primarily used as a means of weight control, anorexia
nervosa should be the primary diagnosis.
Some individuals with factitious disorder may intentionally ingest foreign
objects as part of the pattern of falsification of physical symptoms. In such instances, there is an
element of deception that is consistent with deliberate induction of injury or disease.
Some 
individuals
may swallow potentially harmful items (e.g., pins, needles, knives) in the context of maladaptive
behavior patterns associated with personality disorders or nonsuicidal self-injury.
Comorbidity
Disorders most commonly comorbid with pica are autism spectrum disorder and intellectual
developmental disorder (intellectual disability) and, to a lesser degree, schizophrenia and
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Pica can be associated with trichotillomania (hair-pulling
disorder) and excoriation (skin-picking) disorder. In comorbid presentations, the hair or skin is
typically ingested. Pica can also be associated with avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder,
particularly in individuals with a strong sensory component to their presentation. When an
individual is known to have pica, assessment should include consideration of the possibility of
gastrointestinal complications, poisoning, infection, and nutritional deficiency.
374
Rumination Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Repeated regurgitation of food over a period of at least 1 month. Regurgitated
food may be re-chewed, re-swallowed, or spit out.
B. The repeated regurgitation is not attributable to an associated gastrointestinal or
other medical condition (e.g., gastroesophageal reflux, pyloric stenosis).
C. The eating disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of anorexia
nervosa, bulimia nervosa, binge-eating disorder, or avoidant/restrictive food
intake disorder.
D. If the symptoms occur in the context of another mental disorder (e.g., intellectual
developmental disorder [intellectual disability] or another neurodevelopmental
