disorder), they are sufficiently severe to warrant additional clinical attention.
Specify if:
In remission: After full criteria for rumination disorder were previously met, the
criteria have not been met for a sustained period of time.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of rumination disorder is the repeated regurgitation of food occurring after
feeding or eating over a period of at least 1 month (Criterion A). Previously swallowed food that
may be partially digested is brought up into the mouth without apparent nausea, involuntary
retching, or disgust. The food may be re-chewed and then ejected from the mouth or re-
swallowed. Regurgitation in rumination disorder should be frequent, occurring at least several
times per week, typically daily. The behavior is not better explained by an associated
gastrointestinal or other medical condition (e.g., gastroesophageal reflux, pyloric stenosis)
(Criterion B) and does not occur exclusively during the course of anorexia nervosa, bulimia
nervosa, binge-eating disorder, or avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder (Criterion C). If the
symptoms occur in the context of another mental disorder (e.g., intellectual developmental
disorder [intellectual disability]), they must be sufficiently severe to warrant additional clinical
attention (Criterion D) and should represent a primary aspect of the individual’s presentation
requiring intervention. The disorder may be diagnosed across the life span, particularly in
individuals who also have intellectual developmental disorder. Many individuals with rumination
disorder can be directly observed engaging in the behavior by the clinician. In other instances
diagnosis can be made on the basis of self-report or corroborative information from parents or
caregivers. Individuals may describe the behavior as habitual or outside of their control.
Associated Features
Infants with rumination disorder display a characteristic position of straining and arching the
back with the head held back, making sucking movements with their tongue. They may give the
impression of gaining satisfaction from the activity. They may be irritable and hungry between
episodes of regurgitation. Weight loss and failure to make expected weight gains are common
features in infants with rumination disorder. Malnutrition may occur despite the infant’s apparent
hunger and the ingestion of relatively large amounts of food, particularly in severe cases, when
regurgitation immediately follows each feeding episode and regurgitated food is expelled.
Malnutrition might also occur in older children and adults, particularly when the regurgitation is
accompanied by restriction of intake. Adolescents and adults may attempt to disguise the
regurgitation behavior by placing a hand over the mouth or coughing. Some will avoid eating
with others because of the acknowledged social undesirability of the
375
behavior. This may extend to an avoidance of eating prior to social situations, such as work or
school (e.g., avoiding breakfast because it may be followed by regurgitation).
Prevalence
