Environmental.
Gastrointestinal conditions.
Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa.
Although rumination disorder was historically described primarily among individuals with
intellectual disability, the limited European data available on prevalence suggest that the disorder
may occur in approximately 1%–2% of grade-school-age children.
Development and Course
Onset of rumination disorder can occur in infancy, childhood, adolescence, or adulthood. The
age at onset in infants is usually between ages 3 and 12 months. In infants, the disorder
frequently remits spontaneously, but its course can be protracted and can result in medical
emergencies (e.g., severe malnutrition). It can potentially be fatal, particularly in infancy.
Rumination disorder can have an episodic course or occur continuously until treated. In infants,
as well as in older individuals with intellectual developmental disorder or other
neurodevelopmental disorders, the regurgitation and rumination behavior appears to have a self-
soothing or self-stimulating function, similar to that of other repetitive motor behaviors such as
head banging.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Psychosocial problems such as lack of stimulation, neglect, stressful life
situations, and problems in the parent-child relationship may be predisposing factors in infants
and young children.
Functional Consequences of Rumination Disorder
Malnutrition secondary to repeated regurgitation may be associated with growth delay and have
a negative effect on development and learning potential. Some older individuals with rumination
disorder deliberately restrict their food intake because of the social undesirability of
regurgitation. They may therefore present with weight loss or low weight. In older children,
adolescents, and adults, social functioning is more likely to be adversely affected.
Differential Diagnosis
It is important to differentiate regurgitation in rumination disorder
from other conditions characterized by gastroesophageal reflux or vomiting, such as
gastroparesis, pyloric stenosis, hiatal hernia, and Sandifer syndrome in infants. These other
medical conditions can usually be ruled out on the basis of history and clinical observation.
Individuals with anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa may
also engage in regurgitation with subsequent spitting out of food as a means of disposing of
ingested calories because of concerns about weight gain.
Comorbidity
Regurgitation with associated rumination can occur in the context of a concurrent medical
condition or another mental disorder (e.g., generalized anxiety disorder). When the regurgitation
occurs in this context, a diagnosis of rumination disorder is appropriate only when the severity of
the disturbance exceeds that routinely associated with such conditions or disorders and warrants
additional clinical attention.
