F50.82
376
Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. An eating or feeding disturbance (e.g., apparent lack of interest in eating or food;
avoidance based on the sensory characteristics of food; concern about aversive
consequences of eating) associated with one (or more) of the following:
1. Significant weight loss (or failure to achieve expected weight gain or faltering
growth in children).
2. Significant nutritional deficiency.
3. Dependence on enteral feeding or oral nutritional supplements.
4. Marked interference with psychosocial functioning.
B. The disturbance is not better explained by lack of available food or by an
associated culturally sanctioned practice.
C. The eating disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of anorexia
nervosa or bulimia nervosa, and there is no evidence of a disturbance in the way
in which one’s body weight or shape is experienced.
D. The eating disturbance is not attributable to a concurrent medical condition or
not better explained by another mental disorder. When the eating disturbance
occurs in the context of another condition or disorder, the severity of the eating
disturbance exceeds that routinely associated with the condition or disorder and
warrants additional clinical attention.
Specify if:
In remission: After full criteria for avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder were
previously met, the criteria have not been met for a sustained period of time.
Diagnostic Features
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder replaces and extends the DSM-IV diagnosis of feeding
disorder of infancy or early childhood to include older children, adolescents, and adults. The
main diagnostic feature of avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder is avoidance or restriction of
food intake that is associated with one or more of the following consequences: significant weight
loss, significant nutritional deficiency (or related health impact), dependence on enteral feeding
or oral nutritional supplements, or marked interference with psychosocial functioning (Criterion
A).
In some individuals, food avoidance or restriction is based on the sensory characteristics of
qualities of food, such as extreme sensitivity to appearance, color, smell, texture, temperature, or
taste. Such behavior has been described as “restrictive eating,” “selective eating,” “choosy
eating,” “perseverant eating,” “chronic food refusal,” and “food neophobia” and may manifest as
