refusal to eat particular brands of foods or to tolerate the smell of food being eaten by others.
Individuals with heightened sensory sensitivities associated with autism may show similar
behaviors.
In other individuals, food avoidance or restriction represents a conditioned negative response
associated with food intake following, or in anticipation of, an aversive experience, such as
choking; a traumatic procedure, usually involving the gastrointestinal tract (e.g.,
esophagoscopy); or repeated vomiting. The terms functional dysphagia and globus hystericus
have also been used for such conditions.
In yet other individuals, food avoidance or restriction manifests as a lack of interest in eating
or food.
The determination of whether weight loss is significant (Criterion A1) is a clinical judgment;
instead of losing weight, children and adolescents who have not completed growth may not
maintain weight or height increases along their developmental trajectory.
377
Determination of significant nutritional deficiency (Criterion A2) is also based on clinical
assessment (e.g., assessment of dietary intake, physical examination, and laboratory testing), and
related impact on physical health can be of a similar severity to that seen in anorexia nervosa
(e.g., hypothermia, bradycardia, anemia). In severe cases, particularly in infants, malnutrition can
be life-threatening. “Dependence” on enteral feeding or oral nutritional supplements (Criterion
A3) means that supplementary feeding is required to sustain adequate intake. Examples of
individuals requiring supplementary feeding include infants with failure to thrive who require
nasogastric tube feeding, children with neurodevelopmental disorders who are dependent on
nutritionally complete supplements, and individuals who rely on gastrostomy tube feeding or
complete oral nutrition supplements in the absence of an underlying medical condition. Inability
to participate in normal social activities, such as eating with others, attending school or work, or
sustaining relationships as a result of the disturbance would indicate marked interference with
psychosocial functioning (Criterion A4). Substantial disruption of family functioning (e.g.,
marked restriction of foods permitted in the home, inordinate accommodations to provide foods
from specific grocery stores or restaurants) may also satisfy Criterion A4.
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder does not include avoidance or restriction of food
intake related to lack of availability of food (e.g., food insecurity) or to cultural practices (e.g.,
religious fasting or normal dieting) (Criterion B). The disturbance is not better explained by
excessive concern about body weight or shape (Criterion C) or by concurrent medical factors or
mental disorders (Criterion D).
Associated Features
Several features may be associated with food avoidance or reduced food intake, and these
features may differ across ages. Very young infants may present with food refusal, gagging, or
vomiting. Infants and young children may not engage with a primary caregiver during feeding or
communicate hunger in favor of other activities. In older children and adolescents, food
avoidance or restriction may be associated with more generalized emotional difficulties that do
not meet diagnostic criteria for an anxiety, depressive, or bipolar disorder, sometimes called
