Temperamental.
Environmental.
“food avoidance emotional disorder.”
Prevalence
Little information is available on the prevalence of avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder. A
study in Australia reported a frequency of 0.3% among individuals age 15 years or older.
Development and Course
Food avoidance or restriction associated with insufficient intake or lack of interest in eating most
commonly develops in infancy or early childhood and may persist in adulthood. Likewise,
avoidance based on sensory characteristics of food tends to arise in the first decade of life but
may persist into adulthood. Avoidance related to aversive consequences can arise at any age. The
scant literature regarding long-term outcomes suggests that food avoidance or restriction based
on sensory aspects is relatively stable and long-standing, but when persisting into adulthood,
such avoidance/restriction can be associated with relatively normal functioning. There is
currently insufficient evidence directly linking avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder and
subsequent onset of an eating disorder.
Infants with avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder may be irritable and difficult to console
during feeding, or may appear apathetic and withdrawn. In some instances, caregiver-child
interaction may contribute to the infant’s feeding problem (e.g., presenting food inappropriately,
or interpreting the infant’s behavior as an act of aggression or rejection). Inadequate nutritional
intake may exacerbate the associated features (e.g., irritability, developmental lags) and further
contribute to feeding difficulties. Associated factors
378
include infant temperament or developmental impairments that reduce an infant’s
responsiveness to feeding. Coexisting parental psychopathology, or child abuse or neglect, is
suggested if feeding and weight improve in response to changing caregivers. In infants, children,
and prepubertal adolescents, avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder may be associated with
growth delay, and the resulting malnutrition negatively affects development and learning
potential. In older children, adolescents, and adults, social functioning tends to be adversely
affected. Regardless of the age, family function may be affected, with heightened stress at
mealtimes and in other feeding or eating contexts involving friends and relatives.
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder manifests more commonly in children and
adolescents than in adults, and there may be a long delay between onset and clinical presentation.
Triggers for presentation vary considerably and include physical, social, and emotional
difficulties.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Anxiety disorders, autism spectrum disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder may increase risk for avoidant or restrictive feeding or
eating behavior characteristic of the disorder.
Environmental risk factors for avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder include
familial anxiety. Higher rates of feeding disturbances may occur in children of mothers with
