Genetic and physiological.
Other medical conditions (e.g., gastrointestinal disease, food allergies and intolerances, occult
malignancies).
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to pediatric acute-onset neuropsychiatric
eating disorders.
History of gastrointestinal conditions, gastroesophageal reflux disease,
vomiting, and a range of other medical problems has been associated with feeding and eating
behaviors characteristic of avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Presentations similar to avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder occur in various populations,
including in the United States, Canada, Australia, Europe, Japan, and China. Avoidant/restrictive
food intake disorder should not be diagnosed when avoidance of food intake is solely related to
specific religious or cultural practices.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder appears to be approximately equally common in boys
and girls, but avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder comorbid with autism spectrum disorder
has a male predominance. Food avoidance or restriction related to altered sensory sensitivities
can occur in some physiological conditions, most notably pregnancy, but is not usually extreme
and does not meet full criteria for the disorder.
Functional Consequences of Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder
Associated developmental and functional limitations include impairment of physical
development and social difficulties that can have a significant negative impact on family
function.
Differential Diagnosis
Restriction of food intake is a nonspecific symptom that can accompany a number of mental
disorders and medical conditions and that can also be developmentally appropriate.
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder can be diagnosed concurrently with the disorders below
if all criteria are met, and the eating disturbance requires specific clinical attention.
379
Restriction of food intake may occur in other medical conditions, especially those with ongoing
symptoms such as vomiting, loss of appetite, nausea, abdominal pain, or diarrhea. A diagnosis of
avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder requires that the disturbance of intake is beyond that
directly accounted for by physical symptoms consistent with a medical condition; the eating
disturbance may also persist after being triggered by a medical condition and following
resolution of the medical condition.
Underlying medical or comorbid mental conditions may complicate feeding and eating.
Because older individuals, postsurgical patients, and individuals receiving chemotherapy often
lose their appetite, an additional diagnosis of avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder requires
that the eating disturbance is a primary focus for intervention.
