syndrome.
Specific neurological/neuromuscular, structural, or congenital disorders and conditions
associated with feeding difficulties.
Reactive attachment disorder.
Autism spectrum disorder.
Specific phobia, social anxiety disorder, and other anxiety disorders.
Anorexia nervosa.
Acute-onset symptoms, late age at onset, or atypical symptoms suggest the need for a thorough
assessment to rule out the diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to
pediatric acute-onset neuropsychiatric syndrome (PANS). PANS is characterized by abrupt,
dramatic onset of obsessive-compulsive symptoms or severely restricted food intake, together
with a range of additional neuropsychiatric symptoms.
Feeding difficulties are common in a number of congenital and neurological conditions often
related to problems with oral/esophageal/pharyngeal structure and function, such as hypotonia of
musculature, tongue protrusion, and unsafe swallowing. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder
can be diagnosed in individuals with such presentations as long as all diagnostic criteria are met.
Some degree of withdrawal from caregivers is characteristic of
reactive attachment disorder and can lead to a disturbance in the caregiver-child relationship that
can affect feeding and the child’s intake. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder should be
diagnosed concurrently only if all criteria are met for both disorders and the feeding disturbance
is a primary focus for intervention.
Individuals with autism spectrum disorder often present with rigid
eating behaviors and heightened sensory sensitivities. However, these features do not always
result in the level of impairment that would be required for a diagnosis of avoidant/restrictive
food intake disorder. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder should be diagnosed concurrently
only if all criteria are met for both disorders and when the eating disturbance requires specific
treatment.
Specific 
phobia, 
other 
type,
includes as an example “situations that may lead to choking or vomiting” and can represent the
primary trigger for the fear, anxiety, or avoidance required for diagnosis. Distinguishing specific
phobia from avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder can be difficult when a fear of choking or
vomiting has resulted in food avoidance. Although avoidance or restriction of food intake
secondary to a pronounced fear of choking or vomiting can be conceptualized as specific phobia,
in situations when the eating problem becomes the primary focus of clinical attention,
avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder becomes the appropriate diagnosis. In social anxiety
disorder, the individual may present with a fear of being observed by others while eating, which
can also occur in avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder.
Restriction of energy intake relative to requirements leading to significantly
low body weight is a core feature of anorexia nervosa. However, individuals with anorexia
nervosa also display a fear of gaining weight or of becoming fat, or persistent behavior that
interferes with weight gain, as well as specific disturbances in
380
relation to perception and experience of their own body weight and shape. These features are not
present in avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder, and the two disorders should not be
diagnosed concurrently. Differential diagnosis between avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder
and anorexia nervosa may be difficult, especially in late childhood and early adolescence,
because these disorders may share a number of common symptoms (e.g., food avoidance, low
