Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Major depressive disorder.
Schizophrenia spectrum disorders.
Factitious disorder or factitious disorder imposed on another.
Developmentally normal behavior.
weight). Differential diagnosis is also potentially difficult in individuals with anorexia nervosa
who deny any fear of fatness but nonetheless engage in persistent behaviors that prevent weight
gain and who do not recognize the medical seriousness of their low weight—a presentation
sometimes termed “non–fat phobic anorexia nervosa.” Full consideration of symptoms, course,
and family history is advised, and diagnosis may be best made in the context of a clinical
relationship over time. In some individuals, avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder might
precede the onset of anorexia nervosa.
Individuals with obsessive-compulsive disorder may present with
avoidance or restriction of intake in relation to preoccupations with food or ritualized eating
behavior. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder should be diagnosed concurrently only if all
criteria are met for both disorders and when the aberrant eating is a major aspect of the clinical
presentation requiring specific intervention.
In major depressive disorder, appetite might be affected to such an
extent that individuals present with significantly restricted food intake, usually in relation to
overall energy intake and often associated with weight loss. Usually appetite loss and related
reduction of intake abate with resolution of mood problems. Avoidant/restrictive food intake
disorder should only be used concurrently if full criteria are met for both disorders and when the
eating disturbance requires specific treatment.
Individuals with schizophrenia, delusional disorder, or other
psychotic disorders may exhibit odd eating behaviors, avoidance of specific foods because of
delusional beliefs, or other manifestations of avoidant or restrictive intake. In some cases,
delusional beliefs may contribute to a concern about negative consequences of ingesting certain
foods. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder should be used concurrently only if all criteria
are met for both disorders and when the eating disturbance requires specific treatment.
Avoidant/restrictive 
food 
intake
disorder should be differentiated from factitious disorder or factitious disorder imposed on
another. In order to assume the sick role, some individuals with factitious disorder may
intentionally describe diets that are much more restrictive than those they are actually able to
consume, as well as complications of such behavior, such as a need for enteral feedings or
nutritional supplements, an inability to tolerate a normal range of foods, and/or an inability to
participate normally in age-appropriate situations involving food. The presentation may be
impressively dramatic and engaging, and the symptoms reported inconsistently. In factitious
disorder 
imposed 
on 
another, 
the 
caregiver 
describes 
symptoms 
consistent 
with
avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder and may induce physical symptoms such as failure to
gain weight. As with any diagnosis of factitious disorder imposed on another, the caregiver
receives the diagnosis rather than the affected individual, and diagnosis should be made only on
the basis of a careful, comprehensive assessment of the affected individual, the caregiver, and
their interaction.
During normal development, some toddlers and children
transiently narrow the variety of foods they are willing to eat. This phenomenon, sometimes
referred to as “picky eating,” usually resolves spontaneously without intervention.
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder does not include such developmentally normal
behaviors unless they become sufficiently severe to lead to failure to meet appropriate nutritional
