needs or produce significant impairment in functioning (Criterion A).
381
Comorbidity
The most commonly observed disorders comorbid with avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder
are anxiety disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and neurodevelopmental disorders
(specifically autism spectrum disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and intellectual
developmental disorder [intellectual disability]).
Anorexia Nervosa
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Restriction of energy intake relative to requirements, leading to a significantly low
body weight in the context of age, sex, developmental trajectory, and physical
health. Significantly low weight is defined as a weight that is less than minimally
normal or, for children and adolescents, less than that minimally expected.
B. Intense fear of gaining weight or of becoming fat, or persistent behavior that
interferes with weight gain, even though at a significantly low weight.
C. Disturbance in the way in which one’s body weight or shape is experienced,
undue influence of body weight or shape on self-evaluation, or persistent lack of
recognition of the seriousness of the current low body weight.
Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on the subtype (see below).
Specify whether:
F50.01 Restricting type: During the last 3 months, the individual has not
engaged in recurrent episodes of binge-eating or purging behavior (i.e., self-
induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas). This subtype
describes presentations in which weight loss is accomplished primarily through
dieting, fasting, and/or excessive exercise.
F50.02 Binge-eating/purging type: During the last 3 months, the individual has
engaged in recurrent episodes of binge-eating or purging behavior (i.e., self-
induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas).
Specify if:
In partial remission: After full criteria for anorexia nervosa were previously met,
Criterion A (low body weight) has not been met for a sustained period, but either
Criterion B (intense fear of gaining weight or becoming fat or behavior that
interferes with weight gain) or Criterion C (disturbances in self-perception of
weight and shape) is still met.
In full remission: After full criteria for anorexia nervosa were previously met,
none of the criteria have been met for a sustained period of time.
