Specify current severity:
The minimum level of severity is based, for adults, on current body mass index (BMI)
(see below) or, for children and adolescents, on BMI percentile. The ranges below
are derived from World Health Organization categories for thinness in adults; for
children and adolescents, corresponding BMI percentiles should be used. The level
of severity may be increased to reflect clinical symptoms, the degree of functional
disability, and the need for supervision.
Mild: BMI ≥ 17 kg/m2.
Moderate: BMI 16–16.99 kg/m2.
Severe: BMI 15–15.99 kg/m2.
Extreme: BMI < 15 kg/m2.
382
Subtypes
Most individuals with the binge-eating/purging type of anorexia nervosa who binge eat also
purge through self-induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas. Some
individuals with this subtype of anorexia nervosa do not binge eat but do regularly purge after
the consumption of small amounts of food.
Crossover between the subtypes over the course of the disorder is not uncommon; therefore,
subtype description should be used to describe current symptoms rather than longitudinal course.
Diagnostic Features
There are three essential features of anorexia nervosa: persistent energy intake restriction; intense
fear of gaining weight or of becoming fat, or persistent behavior that interferes with weight gain;
and a disturbance in self-perceived weight or shape. The individual maintains a body weight that
is below a minimally normal level for age, sex, developmental trajectory, and physical health
(Criterion A). Individuals’ body weights frequently meet this criterion following a significant
weight loss, but among children and adolescents, there may alternatively be failure to make
expected weight gain or to maintain a normal developmental trajectory (i.e., while growing in
height) instead of weight loss.
Criterion A requires that the individual’s weight be significantly low (i.e., less than
minimally normal or, for children and adolescents, less than that minimally expected). Weight
assessment can be challenging because normal weight range differs among individuals, and
different thresholds have been published defining thinness or underweight status. Body mass
index (BMI; calculated as weight in kilograms/height in meters2) is a useful measure to assess
body weight for height. For adults, a BMI of 18.5 kg/m2 has been employed by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the World Health Organization (WHO) as the lower
limit of normal body weight. Therefore, most adults with a BMI greater than or equal to 18.5
kg/m2 would not be considered to have a significantly low body weight. On the other hand, a
BMI of lower than 17.0 kg/m2 has been considered by the WHO to indicate moderate or severe
thinness; therefore, an individual with a BMI less than 17.0 kg/m2 would likely be considered to
