have a significantly low weight. An adult with a BMI between 17.0 and 18.5 kg/m2, or even
slightly above 18.5 kg/m2, might be considered to have a significantly low weight if clinical
history or other physiological information supports this judgment. Adults who are not
underweight by population-based standards—for example, adults with BMIs of 19.0 kg/m2 or
greater—should not be assigned a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa; a diagnosis of other specified
feeding or eating disorder (atypical anorexia nervosa) may be considered for such individuals.
For children and adolescents, determining a BMI-for-age percentile is useful (see, e.g., the
CDC 
BMI 
percentile 
calculator 
for 
children 
and 
teenagers;
https://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/bmi/calculator.html). As for adults, it is not possible to
provide definitive standards for judging whether a child’s or an adolescent’s weight is
significantly low, and variations in developmental trajectories among youth limit the utility of
simple numerical guidelines. The CDC has used a BMI-for-age below the 5th percentile as
suggesting underweight; children and adolescents with a BMI above this benchmark may be
judged to be significantly underweight in light of failure to maintain their expected growth
trajectory. However, such individuals whose BMI nonetheless remains greater than the median
BMI for age should not be assigned a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa; a diagnosis of other
specified feeding or eating disorder (atypical anorexia nervosa) may be considered for such
individuals.
Individuals with this disorder typically display an intense fear of gaining weight or of
becoming fat (Criterion B). This intense fear of becoming fat is usually not alleviated by weight
loss. In fact, concern about weight gain may increase even as weight falls. Younger individuals
with anorexia nervosa, as well as some adults, may not recognize or
383
acknowledge a fear of weight gain. In the absence of another explanation for the significantly
low weight, clinician inference drawn from collateral history, observational data, physical and
laboratory findings, or longitudinal course either indicating a fear of weight gain or supporting
persistent behaviors that prevent it may be used to establish Criterion B.
The experience and significance of body weight and shape are distorted in these individuals
(Criterion C). Some individuals feel globally overweight. Others realize that they are thin but are
still concerned that certain body parts, particularly the abdomen, buttocks, and thighs, are “too
fat.” They may employ a variety of techniques to evaluate their body size or weight, including
frequent weighing, obsessive measuring of body parts, and persistent use of a mirror to check for
perceived areas of “fat.” The self-esteem of individuals with anorexia nervosa is highly
dependent on their perceptions of body shape and weight. Weight loss is often viewed as an
impressive achievement and a sign of extraordinary self-discipline, whereas weight gain is
perceived as an unacceptable failure of self-control. Although some individuals with this
disorder may acknowledge being thin, they often do not recognize the serious medical
implications of their malnourished state.
Often, the individual is brought to professional attention by family members after marked
weight loss (or failure to make expected weight gains) has occurred. If individuals seek help on
their own, it is usually because of distress over the somatic and psychological sequelae of
starvation. It is rare for an individual with anorexia nervosa to complain of weight loss per se. In
fact, individuals with anorexia nervosa frequently either lack insight into or deny the problem. It
