is therefore often important to obtain information from family members or other sources to
evaluate the history of weight loss and other features of the illness.
Associated Features
The semistarvation of anorexia nervosa, and the purging behaviors sometimes associated with it,
can result in significant and potentially life-threatening medical conditions. The nutritional
compromise associated with this disorder affects most major organ systems and can produce a
variety of disturbances. Physiological disturbances, including amenorrhea and vital sign
abnormalities, are common. While most of the physiological disturbances associated with
malnutrition are reversible with nutritional rehabilitation, some, including loss of bone mineral
density, are often not completely reversible. Behaviors such as self-induced vomiting and misuse
of laxatives, diuretics, and enemas may cause a number of disturbances that lead to abnormal
laboratory findings; however, some individuals with anorexia nervosa exhibit no laboratory
abnormalities.
When seriously underweight, many individuals with anorexia nervosa have depressive signs
and symptoms such as depressed mood, social withdrawal, irritability, insomnia, and diminished
interest in sex. Because these features are also observed in individuals without anorexia nervosa
who are significantly undernourished, many of the depressive features may be secondary to the
physiological sequelae of semistarvation, although they may also be sufficiently severe to
warrant an additional diagnosis of major depressive disorder.
Obsessive-compulsive features, both related and unrelated to food, are often prominent. Most
individuals with anorexia nervosa are preoccupied with thoughts of food. Some collect recipes or
hoard food. Observations of behaviors associated with other forms of starvation suggest that
obsessions and compulsions related to food may be exacerbated by undernutrition. When
individuals with anorexia nervosa exhibit obsessions and compulsions that are not related to
food, body shape, or weight, an additional diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
may be warranted.
Other features sometimes associated with anorexia nervosa include concerns about eating in
public, feelings of ineffectiveness, a strong desire to control one’s environment, inflexible
thinking, limited social spontaneity, and overly restrained emotional expression.
384
Compared with individuals with anorexia nervosa, restricting type, those with binge-
eating/purging type have higher rates of impulsivity and are more likely to abuse alcohol and
other drugs.
Some individuals with anorexia nervosa show excessive levels of physical activity. Increases
in physical activity often precede onset of the disorder, and over the course of the disorder
increased activity accelerates weight loss. During treatment, excessive activity may be difficult
to control, thereby jeopardizing weight recovery.
Individuals with anorexia nervosa may misuse medications, such as by manipulating dosage,
in order to achieve weight loss or avoid weight gain. Individuals with diabetes mellitus may omit
or reduce insulin doses in order to minimize carbohydrate utilization.
