Temperamental.
Environmental.
Prevalence
According to two U.S. epidemiological studies conducted in community samples, the 12-month
prevalence of anorexia nervosa ranges from 0.0% to 0.05% with much higher rates in women
than in men (0% to 0.08% in women; 0% to 0.01% in men), and the lifetime prevalence ranges
from 0.60% to 0.80% (0.9% to 1.42% in women; 0.12% to 0.3% in men). By contrast, one study
of adolescents found similar rates in both genders.
Anorexia nervosa appears to be most prevalent in postindustrialized, high-income countries
such as in the United States, many European countries, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan.
Although the prevalence of anorexia nervosa is uncertain in most low- and middle-income
countries, it appears to be increasing in many countries in the Global South, including in Asia
and the Middle East. Anorexia nervosa occurs across U.S. ethnoracial groups; however, its
prevalence seems to be lower among Latinx and non-Latinx Black Americans than among non-
Latinx Whites.
Development and Course
Anorexia nervosa commonly begins during adolescence or young adulthood. It rarely begins
before puberty or after age 40, but cases of both early and late onset have been described. The
onset of this disorder is often associated with a stressful life event, such as leaving home for
college. The course and outcome of anorexia nervosa are highly variable. Younger individuals
may manifest atypical features, including denying “fear of fat.” Older individuals more likely
have a longer duration of illness, and their clinical presentation may include more signs and
symptoms of long-standing disorder. Clinicians should not exclude anorexia nervosa from the
differential diagnosis solely on the basis of older age.
Many individuals have a period of changed eating behavior prior to full criteria for the
disorder being met. Some individuals with anorexia nervosa recover fully after a single episode,
with some exhibiting a fluctuating pattern of weight gain followed by relapse, and others
experiencing a chronic course over many years. Hospitalization may be required to restore
weight and to address medical complications. Most individuals with anorexia nervosa experience
remission within 5 years of presentation. Among individuals admitted to hospitals, overall
remission rates may be lower. The crude mortality rate for anorexia nervosa is approximately 5%
per decade. Death most commonly results from medical complications associated with the
disorder itself or from suicide.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Individuals who develop anxiety disorders or display obsessional traits in
childhood are at increased risk for developing anorexia nervosa.
Historical and cross-cultural variability in the prevalence of anorexia nervosa
supports its association with cultures and settings in which thinness is valued. Occupations and
avocations that encourage thinness, such as modeling and elite athletics, are also associated with
increased risk.
385
