Genetic and physiological.
Hematology.
Serum chemistry.
Endocrine.
Electrocardiography.
Bone mass.
Electroencephalography.
Resting energy expenditure.
There is an increased risk for anorexia nervosa and for other eating and
psychiatric disorders among biological relatives of individuals with anorexia nervosa. Genome-
wide association studies have begun to identify specific risk loci, including loci associated with
other psychiatric disorders and with metabolic traits such as insulin resistance and lipid profile.
A range of brain abnormalities, many suggesting abnormal processing of reward, has been
described in anorexia nervosa using functional imaging technologies such as functional magnetic
resonance imaging and positron emission tomography. The degree to which these findings reflect
changes associated with malnutrition versus primary abnormalities associated with the disorder
is unclear.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Anorexia nervosa occurs across culturally and socially diverse populations, although available
evidence suggests cross-cultural variation in its occurrence and presentation. The presentation of
weight concerns among individuals with feeding and eating disorders varies substantially across
cultural contexts. The absence of an expressed intense fear of weight gain, sometimes referred to
as “fat phobia,” appears to be relatively more common in populations in Asia, where the
rationale for dietary restriction is commonly related to a more culturally sanctioned complaint
such as gastrointestinal discomfort. Mental health service utilization in the United States among
individuals with an eating disorder is significantly lower among underserved ethnic and
racialized groups.
Diagnostic Markers
The following laboratory abnormalities may be observed in anorexia nervosa; their presence may
serve to increase diagnostic confidence.
Leukopenia is common, with the loss of all cell types but usually with apparent
lymphocytosis. Mild anemia can occur, as well as thrombocytopenia and, rarely, bleeding
problems.
Dehydration may be reflected by an elevated blood urea nitrogen level.
Hypercholesterolemia is common. Hepatic enzyme levels may be elevated. Hypomagnesemia,
hypozincemia, hypophosphatemia, and hyperamylasemia are occasionally observed. Self-
induced vomiting may lead to metabolic alkalosis (elevated serum bicarbonate), hypochloremia,
and hypokalemia; laxative abuse may cause a mild metabolic acidosis.
Serum thyroxine (T4) levels are usually in the low-normal range; triiodothyronine
(T3) levels are decreased, while reverse T3 levels are elevated. Females have low serum estrogen
levels, whereas males have low levels of serum testosterone.
Sinus bradycardia is common, and, rarely, arrhythmias are noted. Significant
prolongation of the QTc interval is observed in some individuals.
Low bone mineral density, with specific areas of osteopenia or osteoporosis, is often
seen. The risk of fracture is significantly elevated.
Diffuse abnormalities, reflecting a metabolic encephalopathy, may result
from significant fluid and electrolyte disturbances.
There is often a significant reduction in resting energy expenditure.
