Physical signs and symptoms.
Medical conditions (e.g., gastrointestinal disease, hyperthyroidism, occult malignancies, and
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS]).
Many of the physical signs and symptoms of anorexia nervosa are
attributable to starvation. Amenorrhea is commonly present and appears to be an indicator of
physiological dysfunction. If present, amenorrhea is usually a consequence of the weight loss,
but in a minority of individuals it may actually precede the weight loss. In prepubertal females,
menarche may be delayed. In addition to amenorrhea, there may be complaints of constipation,
abdominal pain, cold intolerance, lethargy, and excess energy.
386
The most remarkable finding on physical examination is emaciation. Commonly, there is also
significant hypotension, hypothermia, and bradycardia. Some individuals develop lanugo, a fine
downy body hair. Some develop peripheral edema, especially during weight restoration or upon
cessation of laxative and diuretic abuse. Rarely, petechiae or ecchymoses, usually on the
extremities, may indicate a bleeding diathesis. Some individuals evidence a yellowing of the skin
associated with hypercarotenemia. As may be seen in individuals with bulimia nervosa,
individuals with anorexia nervosa who self-induce vomiting may have hypertrophy of the
salivary glands, particularly the parotid glands, as well as dental enamel erosion. Some
individuals may have scars or calluses on the dorsal surface of the hand from repeated contact
with the teeth while inducing vomiting.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Suicide risk is elevated in anorexia nervosa, with rates reported to be 18 times greater than in an
age- and gender-matched comparison group. A systematic review found that suicide is the
second leading cause of death in anorexia nervosa. Another review found that one-quarter to
one-third of individuals with anorexia nervosa have suicidal ideation, and approximately 9%–
25% of individuals with anorexia nervosa have attempted suicide. Likely contributors to the
increased risk for suicide in those with eating disorders include greater exposure to sexual abuse;
impaired decision-making; high rates of nonsuicidal self-injury, a known risk factor for suicide
attempts; and comorbidity with mood disorders.
Functional Consequences of Anorexia Nervosa
Individuals with anorexia nervosa may exhibit a range of functional limitations associated with
the disorder. While some individuals remain active in social and professional functioning, others
demonstrate significant social isolation and/or failure to fulfill academic or career potential.
Differential Diagnosis
In addition to the general consideration of differential diagnosis for all cases, it is especially
important to consider other possible causes of either significantly low body weight or significant
weight loss when the presenting features are atypical (e.g., onset after age 40 years).
Serious weight loss may occur in medical conditions, but individuals with these disorders usually
do not also manifest a disturbance in the way their body weight or shape is experienced or an
intense fear of weight gain or persist in behaviors that interfere with appropriate weight gain.
