Major depressive disorder.
Schizophrenia.
Substance use disorders.
Social anxiety disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and body dysmorphic disorder.
Bulimia nervosa.
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder.
Acute weight loss associated with a medical condition can occasionally be followed by the onset
or recurrence of anorexia nervosa, which can initially be masked by the comorbid medical
condition. Rarely, anorexia nervosa develops after bariatric surgery.
In major depressive disorder, severe weight loss may occur, but most
individuals with major depressive disorder do not have either a desire for excessive weight loss
or an intense fear of gaining weight.
Individuals with schizophrenia may exhibit odd eating behavior and occasionally
experience significant weight loss, but they rarely show the fear of gaining weight and the body
image disturbance required for a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa.
Individuals with substance use disorders may experience low weight
because of poor nutritional intake but generally do not fear gaining weight and do not manifest
body image disturbance. Individuals who abuse substances that reduce appetite (e.g., cocaine,
stimulants) and who also endorse fear of weight gain should be carefully evaluated for the
possibility of comorbid anorexia nervosa, given that the substance use may represent a persistent
behavior that interferes with weight gain (Criterion B).
387
Some 
of 
the
features of anorexia nervosa overlap with the criteria for social anxiety disorder, OCD, and body
dysmorphic disorder. Specifically, individuals may feel humiliated or embarrassed to be seen
eating in public, as in social anxiety disorder; may exhibit obsessions and compulsions related to
food, as in OCD; or may be preoccupied with an imagined defect in bodily appearance, as in
body dysmorphic disorder. If the individual with anorexia nervosa has social fears that are
limited to eating behavior alone, the diagnosis of social anxiety disorder should not be made, but
social fears unrelated to eating behavior (e.g., excessive fear of speaking in public) may warrant
an additional diagnosis of social anxiety disorder. Similarly, an additional diagnosis of OCD
should be considered only if the individual exhibits obsessions and compulsions unrelated to
food (e.g., an excessive fear of contamination), and an additional diagnosis of body dysmorphic
disorder should be considered only if the distortion is unrelated to body shape and size (e.g.,
preoccupation that one’s nose is too big).
Individuals with bulimia nervosa exhibit recurrent episodes of binge eating,
engage in inappropriate behavior to avoid weight gain (e.g., self-induced vomiting), and are
overly concerned with body shape and weight. However, unlike individuals with anorexia
nervosa, binge-eating/purging type, individuals with bulimia nervosa maintain body weight at or
above a minimally normal level.
Individuals with this disorder may exhibit significant
weight loss or significant nutritional deficiency, but they do not have a fear of gaining weight or
of becoming fat, nor do they have a disturbance in the way they experience their body shape and
weight.
Comorbidity
Bipolar, depressive, and anxiety disorders commonly co-occur with anorexia nervosa. Many
