F50.2
individuals with anorexia nervosa report the presence of either an anxiety disorder or symptoms
of anxiety prior to onset of their eating disorder. OCD is described in some individuals with
anorexia nervosa, especially those with the restricting type. Alcohol use disorder and other
substance use disorders may also be comorbid with anorexia nervosa, especially among those
with the binge-eating/purging type.
Bulimia Nervosa
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recurrent episodes of binge eating. An episode of binge eating is characterized
by both of the following:
1. Eating, in a discrete period of time (e.g., within any 2-hour period), an amount
of food that is definitely larger than what most individuals would eat in a
similar period of time under similar circumstances.
2. A sense of lack of control over eating during the episode (e.g., a feeling that
one cannot stop eating or control what or how much one is eating).
B. Recurrent inappropriate compensatory behaviors in order to prevent weight gain,
such as self-induced vomiting; misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or other
medications; fasting; or excessive exercise.
C. The binge eating and inappropriate compensatory behaviors both occur, on
average, at least once a week for 3 months.
D. Self-evaluation is unduly influenced by body shape and weight.
E. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during episodes of anorexia nervosa.
388
Specify if:
In partial remission: After full criteria for bulimia nervosa were previously met,
some, but not all, of the criteria have been met for a sustained period of time.
In full remission: After full criteria for bulimia nervosa were previously met,
none of the criteria have been met for a sustained period of time.
Specify current severity:
The minimum level of severity is based on the frequency of inappropriate
compensatory behaviors (see below). The level of severity may be increased to
reflect other symptoms and the degree of functional disability.
Mild: An average of 1–3 episodes of inappropriate compensatory behaviors per
week.
Moderate: An average of 4–7 episodes of inappropriate compensatory
behaviors per week.
