Severe: An average of 8–13 episodes of inappropriate compensatory behaviors
per week.
Extreme: An average of 14 or more episodes of inappropriate compensatory
behaviors per week.
Diagnostic Features
There are three essential features of bulimia nervosa: recurrent episodes of binge eating
(Criterion A), recurrent inappropriate compensatory behaviors to prevent weight gain (Criterion
B), and self-evaluation that is unduly influenced by body shape and weight (Criterion D). To
qualify for the diagnosis, the binge eating and inappropriate compensatory behaviors must occur,
on average, at least once per week for 3 months (Criterion C).
An “episode of binge eating” is defined as eating, in a discrete period of time, an amount of
food that is definitely larger than most individuals would eat in a similar period of time under
similar circumstances (Criterion A1). The context in which the eating occurs may affect the
clinician’s estimation of whether the intake is excessive. For example, a quantity of food that
might be regarded as excessive for a typical meal might be considered normal during a
celebration or holiday meal. A “discrete period of time” refers to a limited period, usually less
than 2 hours. A single episode of binge eating need not be restricted to one setting. For example,
an individual may begin a binge in a restaurant and then continue to eat on returning home.
Continual snacking on small amounts of food throughout the day would not be considered an
eating binge.
An occurrence of excessive food consumption must be accompanied by a sense of lack of
control (Criterion A2) to be considered an episode of binge eating. An indicator of loss of control
is the inability to refrain from eating or to stop eating once started. Some individuals describe a
dissociative quality during, or following, the binge-eating episodes. The impairment in control
associated with binge eating may not be absolute; for example, an individual may continue binge
eating while the telephone is ringing but will cease if a roommate or spouse unexpectedly enters
the room. Some individuals report that their binge-eating episodes are no longer characterized by
an acute feeling of loss of control but rather by a more generalized pattern of uncontrolled eating.
If individuals report that they have abandoned efforts to control their eating, loss of control
should be considered as present. Binge eating can also be planned in some instances.
The type of food consumed during binges varies both across individuals and for a given
individual. Binge eating appears to be characterized more by an abnormality in the amount of
food consumed than by a craving for a specific nutrient. However, during binges, individuals
tend to eat foods they would otherwise avoid.
Individuals with bulimia nervosa are typically ashamed of their eating problems and attempt
to conceal their symptoms. Binge eating usually occurs in secrecy or as inconspicuously as
possible. The binge eating often continues until the individual is uncomfortably, or even
painfully, full. The most common antecedent of binge eating is negative affect.
389
Other triggers include interpersonal stressors; dietary restraint; negative feelings related to
body weight, body shape, and food; and boredom. Binge eating may minimize or mitigate factors
