that precipitated the episode in the short-term, but negative self-evaluation and dysphoria often
are the delayed consequences.
Another essential feature of bulimia nervosa is the recurrent use of inappropriate
compensatory behaviors to prevent weight gain (Criterion B). Many individuals with bulimia
nervosa employ several methods to compensate for binge eating. Self-induced vomiting, a type
of purging behavior, is the most common inappropriate compensatory behavior. The immediate
effects of vomiting include relief from physical discomfort and reduction of fear of gaining
weight. In some cases, vomiting becomes a goal in itself, and the individual will binge eat in
order to vomit or will vomit after eating a small amount of food. Individuals with bulimia
nervosa may use a variety of methods to induce vomiting, including the use of fingers or
instruments to stimulate the gag reflex. Individuals generally become adept at inducing vomiting
and are eventually able to vomit at will. Rarely, individuals consume syrup of ipecac to induce
vomiting. Other purging behaviors include the misuse of laxatives and diuretics and, in rare
cases, the misuse of enemas following episodes of binge eating, although this is seldom the sole
compensatory method employed. A number of compensatory methods other than purging may
also be used in rare cases. Some individuals may take thyroid hormone in an attempt to avoid
weight gain. Individuals with diabetes mellitus and bulimia nervosa may omit or reduce insulin
doses in order to reduce the metabolism of food consumed during eating binges. Individuals with
bulimia nervosa may fast for a day or more or exercise excessively in an attempt to prevent
weight gain. Exercise may be considered excessive when it significantly interferes with
important activities, when it occurs at inappropriate times or in inappropriate settings, or when
the individual continues to exercise despite injury or other medical complications.
Individuals with bulimia nervosa place an excessive emphasis on body shape or weight in
their self-evaluation, and these factors are typically extremely important in determining self-
esteem (Criterion D). Individuals with this disorder may closely resemble those with anorexia
nervosa in their fear of gaining weight, in their desire to lose weight, and in the level of
dissatisfaction with their bodies. However, a diagnosis of bulimia nervosa should not be given
when the disturbance occurs only during episodes of anorexia nervosa (Criterion E).
Associated Features
Individuals with bulimia nervosa typically are within the normal weight or overweight range
(body mass index [BMI] ≥ 18.5 and < 30 in adults). The disorder occurs but is uncommon
among obese individuals. Between eating binges, individuals with bulimia nervosa typically
restrict their total caloric consumption and preferentially select low-calorie (“diet”) foods while
avoiding foods that they perceive to be fattening or likely to trigger a binge.
Menstrual irregularity or amenorrhea often occurs among females with bulimia nervosa; it is
uncertain whether such disturbances are related to weight fluctuations, to nutritional deficiencies,
or to emotional distress. The fluid and electrolyte disturbances resulting from the purging
behavior are sometimes sufficiently severe to constitute medically serious problems. Rare but
potentially fatal complications include esophageal tears, gastric rupture, and cardiac arrhythmias.
Serious cardiac and skeletal myopathies have been reported among individuals following
repeated use of syrup of ipecac to induce vomiting. Individuals who chronically abuse laxatives
may become dependent on their use to stimulate bowel movements. Gastrointestinal symptoms
are commonly associated with bulimia nervosa, and rectal prolapse has also been reported among
