Temperamental.
individuals with this disorder.
Prevalence
According to two U.S. epidemiological studies conducted in adult community samples, the 12-
month prevalence of bulimia nervosa ranges from 0.14% to 0.3%, with much higher
390
rates in women than in men (0.22% to 0.5% in women; 0.05% to 0.1% in men), and the lifetime
prevalence ranges from 0.28% to 1.0% (0.46% to 1.5% in women; 0.05% to 0.08% in men). In
one study of adolescents ages 13–18, lifetime prevalence rates were 1.3% and 0.5% in girls and
boys, respectively.
In the United States, the prevalence of bulimia nervosa is similar across U.S. ethnoracial
groups. The reported prevalence of bulimia nervosa is highest in populations residing in high-
income industrialized countries, such as the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and
many European countries; in most of these countries the prevalence of bulimia nervosa is
roughly comparable.
The prevalence of bulimia nervosa in some regions of Latin America and the Middle East is
similar to the prevalence in most high-income countries. The prevalence of bulimia nervosa
appears to be gradually increasing in many low- and middle-income countries.
Development and Course
Bulimia nervosa commonly begins in adolescence or young adulthood. Onset before puberty or
after age 40 is uncommon. The binge eating frequently begins during or after an episode of
dieting to lose weight. Experiencing multiple stressful life events also can precipitate onset of
bulimia nervosa.
Disturbed eating behavior persists for at least several years in a high percentage of clinical
samples. The course may be chronic or intermittent, with periods of remission alternating with
recurrences of binge eating. However, over longer-term follow-up, the symptoms of many
individuals appear to diminish with or without treatment, although treatment clearly impacts
outcome. Periods of remission longer than 1 year are associated with better long-term outcome.
Significantly elevated risk for mortality (all-cause and suicide) has been reported for
individuals with bulimia nervosa. The crude mortality rate (ratio of the number of deaths during
the year to the average population in that year) for bulimia nervosa is nearly 2% per decade.
Diagnostic crossover from initial bulimia nervosa to anorexia nervosa occurs in a minority of
cases (10%–15%). Individuals who do experience crossover to anorexia nervosa commonly will
revert back to bulimia nervosa or have multiple occurrences of crossovers between these
disorders. A subset of individuals with bulimia nervosa continue to binge eat but no longer
engage in inappropriate compensatory behaviors, and therefore their symptoms meet criteria for
binge-eating disorder or other specified eating disorder. Diagnosis should be based on the current
(i.e., past 3 months) clinical presentation.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Weight concerns, low self-esteem, depressive symptoms, social anxiety disorder,
