Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Course modifiers.
and childhood generalized anxiety disorder are associated with increased risk for the
development of bulimia nervosa.
Internalization of a thin body ideal has been found to increase risk for developing
weight concerns, which in turn increases risk for the development of bulimia nervosa.
Individuals who experienced childhood sexual or physical abuse are at increased risk for
developing bulimia nervosa.
Childhood obesity and early pubertal maturation increase risk for
bulimia nervosa. Familial transmission of bulimia nervosa may be present, as well as genetic
vulnerabilities for the disorder.
Severity of psychiatric comorbidity predicts worse long-term outcome of
bulimia nervosa.
391
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Although data show that community-based prevalence of bulimia nervosa does not differ
significantly across U.S. ethnoracial groups, treatment utilization for bulimia nervosa is lower
among underserved U.S. ethnic and racialized groups than among the non-Latinx White
population.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Bulimia nervosa is much more common in girls and women than in boys and men. Boys and men
are especially underrepresented in treatment-seeking samples, for reasons that have not yet been
systematically examined.
Diagnostic Markers
No specific diagnostic test for bulimia nervosa currently exists. However, several laboratory
abnormalities may occur as a consequence of purging and may increase diagnostic certainty.
These include fluid and electrolyte abnormalities, such as hypokalemia (which can provoke
cardiac arrhythmias), hypochloremia, and hyponatremia. The loss of gastric acid through
vomiting may produce a metabolic alkalosis (elevated serum bicarbonate), and the frequent
induction of diarrhea or dehydration through laxative and diuretic abuse can cause metabolic
acidosis. Some individuals with bulimia nervosa exhibit mildly elevated levels of serum amylase,
probably reflecting an increase in the salivary isoenzyme.
Physical examination usually yields no physical findings. However, inspection of the mouth
may reveal significant and permanent loss of dental enamel, especially from lingual surfaces of
the front teeth because of recurrent vomiting. These teeth may become chipped and appear
ragged and “moth-eaten.” There may also be an increased frequency of dental caries. In some
individuals, the salivary glands, particularly the parotid glands, may become notably enlarged.
Individuals who induce vomiting by manually stimulating the gag reflex may develop calluses or
scars on the dorsal surface of the hand from repeated contact with the teeth. Serious cardiac and
skeletal myopathies have been reported among individuals following repeated use of syrup of
ipecac to induce vomiting.
