Anorexia nervosa, binge-eating/purging type.
Binge-eating disorder.
Kleine-Levin syndrome.
Major depressive disorder, with atypical features.
Borderline personality disorder.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Suicide risk is elevated in bulimia nervosa. A review found that approximately one-quarter to
one-third of individuals with bulimia nervosa have had suicidal ideation, and a similar proportion
have attempted suicide.
Functional Consequences of Bulimia Nervosa
Individuals with bulimia nervosa may exhibit a range of functional limitations associated with
the disorder and have reduced health-related quality of life. A minority of individuals report
severe role impairment, with the social-life domain most likely to be adversely affected by
bulimia nervosa.
Differential Diagnosis
Individuals whose binge-eating behavior occurs only
during episodes of anorexia nervosa are given the diagnosis anorexia nervosa, binge-
eating/purging type, and should not be given the additional diagnosis of bulimia nervosa. For
individuals with an initial diagnosis of anorexia nervosa who binge and purge but whose
presentation no longer meets the full criteria for anorexia nervosa, binge-eating/purging type
(e.g., when weight is normal), a diagnosis of bulimia nervosa should be given only when all
criteria for bulimia nervosa have been met for at least 3 months.
392
Some individuals binge eat but do not engage in regular inappropriate
compensatory behaviors. In these cases, the diagnosis of binge-eating disorder should be
considered.
In certain neurological or other medical conditions, such as Kleine-Levin
syndrome, there is disturbed eating behavior, but the characteristic psychological features of
bulimia nervosa, such as overconcern with body shape and weight, are not present.
Overeating is common in major depressive
disorder, with atypical features, but individuals with this disorder do not engage in inappropriate
compensatory behaviors and do not exhibit the excessive concern with body shape and weight
characteristic of bulimia nervosa. If criteria for both disorders are met, both diagnoses should be
given.
Binge-eating behavior is included in the impulsive behavior
criterion that is part of the definition of borderline personality disorder. If the criteria for both
borderline personality disorder and bulimia nervosa are met, both diagnoses should be given.
Comorbidity
Comorbidity with mental disorders is common in individuals with bulimia nervosa, with most
experiencing at least one other mental disorder and many experiencing multiple comorbidities.
Comorbidity is not limited to any particular subset but rather occurs across a wide range of
mental disorders. There is an increased frequency of depressive symptoms (e.g., low self-esteem)
and bipolar and depressive disorders (particularly depressive disorders) in individuals with
