F50.81
bulimia nervosa. In many individuals, the mood disturbance begins at the same time as or
following the development of bulimia nervosa, and individuals often ascribe their mood
disturbances to the bulimia nervosa. However, in some individuals, the mood disturbance clearly
precedes the development of bulimia nervosa. There may also be an increased frequency of
anxiety symptoms (e.g., fear of social situations) or anxiety disorders. These mood and anxiety
disturbances frequently remit following effective treatment of the bulimia nervosa. The lifetime
prevalence of substance use disorder, particularly alcohol use disorder or stimulant use disorder,
is at least 30% among individuals with bulimia nervosa. Stimulant use often begins in an attempt
to control appetite and weight. A substantial percentage of individuals with bulimia nervosa also
have personality features that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders, most frequently
borderline personality disorder.
Binge-Eating Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recurrent episodes of binge eating. An episode of binge eating is characterized
by both of the following:
1. Eating, in a discrete period of time (e.g., within any 2-hour period), an amount
of food that is definitely larger than what most people would eat in a similar
period of time under similar circumstances.
2. A sense of lack of control over eating during the episode (e.g., a feeling that
one cannot stop eating or control what or how much one is eating).
B. The binge-eating episodes are associated with three (or more) of the following:
1. Eating much more rapidly than normal.
2. Eating until feeling uncomfortably full.
393
3. Eating large amounts of food when not feeling physically hungry.
4. Eating alone because of feeling embarrassed by how much one is eating.
5. Feeling disgusted with oneself, depressed, or very guilty afterward.
C. Marked distress regarding binge eating is present.
D. The binge eating occurs, on average, at least once a week for 3 months.
E. The binge eating is not associated with the recurrent use of inappropriate
compensatory behavior as in bulimia nervosa and does not occur exclusively
during the course of bulimia nervosa or anorexia nervosa.
Specify if:
In partial remission: After full criteria for binge-eating disorder were previously
met, binge eating occurs at an average frequency of less than one episode per
