week for a sustained period of time.
In full remission: After full criteria for binge-eating disorder were previously met,
none of the criteria have been met for a sustained period of time.
Specify current severity:
The minimum level of severity is based on the frequency of episodes of binge eating
(see below). The level of severity may be increased to reflect other symptoms and
the degree of functional disability.
Mild: 1–3 binge-eating episodes per week.
Moderate: 4–7 binge-eating episodes per week.
Severe: 8–13 binge-eating episodes per week.
Extreme: 14 or more binge-eating episodes per week.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of binge-eating disorder is recurrent episodes of binge eating that must
occur, on average, at least once per week for 3 months (Criterion D). An “episode of binge
eating” is defined as eating, in a discrete period of time, an amount of food that is definitely
larger than most people would eat in a similar period of time under similar circumstances
(Criterion A1). The context in which the eating occurs may affect the clinician’s estimation of
whether the intake is excessive. For example, a quantity of food that might be regarded as
excessive for a typical meal might be considered normal during a celebration or holiday meal. A
“discrete period of time” refers to a limited period, usually less than 2 hours. A single episode of
binge eating need not be restricted to one setting. For example, an individual may begin a binge
in a restaurant and then continue to eat on returning home. Continual snacking on small amounts
of food throughout the day would not be considered an eating binge.
An occurrence of excessive food consumption must be accompanied by a sense of lack of
control (Criterion A2) to be considered an episode of binge eating. An indicator of loss of control
is the inability to refrain from eating or to stop eating once started. Some individuals describe a
dissociative quality during, or following, the binge-eating episodes. The impairment in control
associated with binge eating may not be absolute; for example, an individual may continue binge
eating while the telephone is ringing but will cease if a roommate or spouse unexpectedly enters
the room. Some individuals report that their binge-eating episodes are no longer characterized by
an acute feeling of loss of control but rather by a more generalized pattern of uncontrolled eating.
If individuals report that they have abandoned efforts to control their eating, loss of control may
still be considered as present. Binge eating can also be planned in some instances.
The type of food consumed during binges varies both across individuals and for a given
individual. Binge eating appears to be characterized more by an abnormality in the amount of
food consumed than by a craving for a specific nutrient.
394
Binge eating must be characterized by marked distress (Criterion C) and at least three of the
following features: eating much more rapidly than normal; eating until feeling uncomfortably
