full; eating large amounts of food when not feeling physically hungry; eating alone because of
feeling embarrassed by how much one is eating; and feeling disgusted with oneself, depressed, or
very guilty afterward (Criterion B).
Individuals with binge-eating disorder are typically ashamed of their eating problems and
attempt to conceal their symptoms. Binge eating usually occurs in secrecy or as inconspicuously
as possible. The most common antecedent of binge eating is negative affect. Other triggers
include interpersonal stressors; dietary restraint; negative feelings related to body weight, body
shape, and food; and boredom. Binge eating may minimize or mitigate factors that precipitated
the episode in the short-term, but negative self-evaluation and dysphoria often are the delayed
consequences.
Associated Features
Binge-eating disorder occurs in normal-weight/overweight and obese individuals. It is reliably
associated with overweight and obesity in treatment-seeking individuals. Nevertheless, binge-
eating disorder is distinct from obesity. Most obese individuals do not engage in recurrent binge
eating. In addition, compared with weight-matched obese individuals without binge-eating
disorder, those with the disorder consume more calories in laboratory studies of eating behavior
and have greater functional impairment, lower quality of life, more subjective distress, and
greater psychiatric comorbidity.
Prevalence
According to two U.S. epidemiological studies conducted in community samples, the 12-month
prevalence of binge-eating disorder ranges from 0.44% to 1.2%, with rates two to three times
higher in women than in men (0.6% to 1.6% in women; 0.26% to 0.8% in men), and the lifetime
prevalence ranges from 0.85% to 2.8% (1.25% to 3.5% in women; 0.42% to 2.0% in men).
In the United States, the prevalence of binge-eating disorder appears comparable across
ethnoracial groups.
Binge-eating disorder has a roughly similar prevalence in most high-income industrialized
countries, including the United States, Canada, many European countries, Australia, and New
Zealand, with 12-month prevalence in high-income countries ranging from 0.1% to 1.2%.
Although fewer data are available from populations in low- and middle-income countries, binge-
eating disorder prevalence in some regions of Latin America appears to be at least as high as in
the United States and Europe. Mexican Americans in the United States have a higher prevalence
of binge-eating disorder than their counterparts in Mexico.
Development and Course
Little is known about the development of binge-eating disorder. Both binge eating and loss-of-
control eating without objectively excessive consumption occur in children and are associated
with increased body fat, weight gain, and increases in psychological symptoms. Binge eating is
common in adolescent and college-age samples. Loss-of-control eating or episodic binge eating
may represent a prodromal phase of eating disorders for some individuals.
Dieting follows the development of binge eating in many individuals with binge-eating
disorder. (This is in contrast to bulimia nervosa, in which dysfunctional dieting usually precedes
