Genetic and physiological.
Bulimia nervosa.
the onset of binge eating.) Binge-eating disorder typically begins in adolescence or young
adulthood but can begin in later adulthood. Individuals with binge-eating disorder who seek
treatment usually are older than individuals with either bulimia nervosa or anorexia nervosa who
seek treatment.
395
Remission rates in both natural course and treatment outcome studies are higher for binge-
eating disorder than for bulimia nervosa or anorexia nervosa. The course of binge-eating disorder
is variable and as yet incompletely understood, with at least some affected individuals showing a
relatively persistent, at times relapsing and remitting, symptom trajectory comparable to that of
bulimia nervosa in terms of severity and duration. Crossover from binge-eating disorder to other
eating disorders is uncommon.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Binge-eating disorder appears to run in families, which may reflect
additive genetic influences.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Clinical presentations of binge-eating disorder differ across ethnoracial groups in the United
States. Black individuals may report fewer symptoms of distress associated with binge eating and
present for treatment with higher frequency of binge eating compared with White individuals.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Suicidal ideation has been reported to occur in approximately 25% of individuals with binge-
eating disorder.
Functional Consequences of Binge-Eating Disorder
Binge-eating disorder is associated with a range of functional consequences, including social role
adjustment problems, impaired health-related quality of life and life satisfaction, increased
medical morbidity and mortality, and associated increased health care utilization compared with
body mass index (BMI)–matched control subjects. It may also be associated with an increased
risk for weight gain and the development of obesity.
Differential Diagnosis
Binge-eating disorder has recurrent binge eating in common with bulimia
nervosa but differs from the latter disorder in some fundamental respects. In terms of clinical
presentation, the recurrent inappropriate compensatory behavior (e.g., purging, driven exercise)
seen in bulimia nervosa is absent in binge-eating disorder. Unlike individuals with bulimia
nervosa, individuals with binge-eating disorder typically do not show marked or sustained
dietary restriction designed to influence body weight and shape between binge-eating episodes.
They may, however, report frequent attempts at dieting. Binge-eating disorder also differs from
bulimia nervosa in terms of response to treatment. Rates of improvement are consistently higher
