Obesity.
Bipolar and depressive disorders.
Borderline personality disorder.
among individuals with binge-eating disorder than among those with bulimia nervosa.
Binge-eating disorder is associated with overweight and obesity but has several key
features that are distinct from obesity. First, levels of overvaluation of body weight and shape are
higher in obese individuals with the disorder than in those without the disorder. Second, rates of
psychiatric comorbidity are significantly higher among obese individuals with the disorder
compared with those without the disorder. Third, the outcome of evidence-based psychological
treatments for binge-eating disorder is more often successful than the treatment of obesity in
individuals with comorbid obesity and binge-eating disorder.
Increases in appetite and weight gain are included in the criteria
for major depressive episode and in the atypical features specifiers for
396
depressive and bipolar disorders. Increased eating in the context of a major depressive episode
may or may not be associated with loss of control. If the full criteria for both disorders are met,
both diagnoses can be given. Binge eating and other symptoms of disordered eating are seen in
association with bipolar disorder. If the full criteria for both disorders are met, both diagnoses
should be given.
Binge eating is included in the impulsive behavior criterion that is
part of the definition of borderline personality disorder. If the full criteria for both disorders are
met, both diagnoses should be given.
Comorbidity
Binge-eating disorder is associated with significant psychiatric comorbidity that is comparable to
that of bulimia nervosa and anorexia nervosa. The most common comorbid disorders are major
depressive disorder and alcohol use disorder. The psychiatric comorbidity is linked to the
severity of binge eating and not to the degree of obesity.
Other Specified Feeding or Eating Disorder
F50.89
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a feeding
and eating disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet
the full criteria for any of the disorders in the feeding and eating disorders diagnostic
class. The other specified feeding or eating disorder category is used in situations in
which the clinician chooses to communicate the specific reason that the presentation
does not meet the criteria for any specific feeding and eating disorder. This is done
by recording “other specified feeding or eating disorder” followed by the specific
reason (e.g., “bulimia nervosa of low frequency”).
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified”
designation include the following:
