F98.0
Elimination Disorders
Elimination disorders all involve the inappropriate elimination of urine or feces and
are usually first diagnosed in childhood or adolescence. This group of disorders includes
enuresis, the repeated voiding of urine into inappropriate places, and encopresis, the repeated
passage of feces into inappropriate places. Subtypes are provided to differentiate nocturnal from
diurnal (i.e., during waking hours) voiding for enuresis and the presence or absence of
constipation and overflow incontinence for encopresis. Although there are minimum age
requirements for diagnosis of both disorders, these are based on developmental age and not
solely on chronological age. Both disorders may be voluntary or involuntary. Although these
disorders typically occur separately, co-occurrence may also be observed.
Enuresis
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Repeated voiding of urine into bed or clothes, whether involuntary or intentional.
B. The behavior is clinically significant as manifested by either a frequency of at
least twice a week for at least 3 consecutive months or the presence of clinically
significant distress or impairment in social, academic (occupational), or other
important areas of functioning.
C. Chronological age is at least 5 years (or equivalent developmental level).
D. The behavior is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g.,
a diuretic, an antipsychotic medication) or another medical condition (e.g.,
diabetes, spina bifida, a seizure disorder).
Specify whether:
Nocturnal only: Passage of urine only during nighttime sleep.
Diurnal only: Passage of urine during waking hours.
Nocturnal and diurnal: A combination of the two subtypes above.
Subtypes
The nocturnal-only subtype of enuresis, sometimes referred to as monosymptomatic enuresis, is
the most common subtype and involves incontinence only during nighttime sleep, typically
during the first one-third of the night. The diurnal-only subtype occurs in the absence of
nocturnal enuresis and may be referred to simply as urinary incontinence. Individuals with this
