subtype can be divided into two groups. Individuals with “urge incontinence” have sudden urge
symptoms and detrusor instability, whereas individuals with “voiding postponement”
consciously defer micturition urges until incontinence results. The nocturnal-and-diurnal subtype
is also known as nonmonosymptomatic enuresis.
400
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of enuresis is repeated voiding of urine during the day or at night into bed
or clothes (Criterion A). Most often the voiding is involuntary, but occasionally it may be
intentional. To qualify for a diagnosis of enuresis, the voiding of urine must occur at least twice a
week for at least 3 consecutive months or must cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, academic (occupational), or other important areas of functioning (Criterion B). The
individual must have reached an age at which continence is expected (i.e., a chronological age of
at least 5 years or, for children with developmental delays, a mental age of at least 5 years)
(Criterion C). The urinary incontinence is not attributable to the physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a diuretic, an antipsychotic medication) or another medical condition (e.g.,
diabetes, spina bifida, ectopic ureter in a female, posterior urethral valves in a male, tethered
cord, a seizure disorder) (Criterion D).
Associated Features
During nocturnal enuresis, occasionally the voiding takes place during rapid eye movement
(REM) sleep, and the child may recall a dream that involved the act of urinating. During daytime
(diurnal) enuresis, the child defers voiding until incontinence occurs, sometimes because of a
reluctance to use the toilet as a result of social anxiety or a preoccupation with school or play
activity. The enuretic events most commonly occur in the early afternoon on school days or after
returning from school. Children with executive functioning problems and other neurological
problems that may be associated with symptoms of disruptive behavior may be at high risk for
urinary incontinence without sensory awareness. It is not uncommon for children with daytime
urinary incontinence and the nocturnal-and-diurnal subtype of enuresis to have persistence of
incontinence after appropriate treatment of an associated infection.
Prevalence
The prevalence of daytime incontinence ranges from 3.2% to 9.0% in children age 7 years, from
1.1% to 4.2% in youth ages 11–13 years, and from 1.2% to 3.0% in adolescents ages 15–17
years.
The prevalence of nocturnal enuresis in the community decreases with age; in several
geographical settings, including the United States, the Netherlands, and Hong Kong, the range is
around 5%–10% among 5-year-olds, 3%–5% among 10-year-olds, and around 1% among
individuals 15 years or older. Boys and members of socially oppressed groups may have higher
prevalence as found in African American children in the United States and Turkish or Moroccan
children in the Netherlands. The disorder may also have higher prevalence in youth with learning
disabilities or attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
