Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Development and Course
Enuresis can follow two courses: a “primary” type, in which the individual has never established
urinary continence, and a “secondary” type, in which the disturbance develops after a period of
established urinary continence. There are no differences in prevalence of comorbid mental
disorders between the two types. By definition, primary enuresis begins at age 5 years. The most
common time for the onset of secondary enuresis is between ages 5 and 8 years, but it may occur
at any time. After age 5 years, the rate of spontaneous remission is 5%–10% per year. Most
children with the disorder become continent by adolescence, but in approximately 1% of cases
the disorder continues into adulthood. Diurnal enuresis is uncommon after age 9 years. While
occasional diurnal incontinence is not uncommon in middle childhood, it is substantially more
common in those who also have other co-occurring mental health problems, including cognitive
and behavioral problems. When enuresis persists into late childhood or adolescence, the
incontinence may resolve, but urinary frequency generally persists and incontinence can recur
later in adulthood in women.
401
Risk and Prognostic Factors
A number of predisposing factors for bladder dysfunction have been suggested, including
developmental delays and neuropsychiatric problems.
Factors recognized to be associated with bladder dysfunction include delayed
toileting and psychosocial stress.
Nocturnal enuresis has been associated with a mismatch between
nocturnal urine production, nocturnal bladder storage capacity, and the ability to arouse from
sleep. Underlying these mechanisms are possibly disorders of central nervous system signal
processing and the default mode network. The increased arousal thresholds do not, however,
mean that these children sleep well; in fact, sleep quality of enuretic children is often poor.
Nocturnal enuresis is a genetically heterogeneous disorder. Heritability has been shown in
family, twin, and segregation analyses. Risk for childhood nocturnal enuresis is approximately
3.6 times higher in offspring of enuretic mothers and 10.1 times higher in the presence of
paternal urinary incontinence. The risk magnitudes for nocturnal enuresis and diurnal
incontinence are similar.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Enuresis has been reported in a variety of European, African, and Asian countries as well as in
the United States. At a national level, prevalence rates are remarkably similar, and there is great
similarity in the developmental trajectories found in different countries. Local school-based
surveys, however, show wide prevalence variation of nocturnal enuresis across settings in Africa,
South Asia, Europe, and the Caribbean (4%–50%), at least in part due to methodological
variation. The very high rates of enuresis in orphanages and other residential institutions are not
explained by the mode or early timing of toilet training.
Cultural contexts affect both the diagnosis and the perceived etiology of enuresis. For
example, traditional Chinese medicine attributes enuresis to long-term kidney yang (masculine
