Neurogenic bladder or another medical condition.
Medication side effects.
energy) deficiency. Heightened impact on parents of children’s enuresis has been reported in
societies with economic limitations in obtaining care for the child or in the context of social
policies that restrict the number of children (e.g., China’s one-child policy), possibly leading to
higher risk of parental emotional disorders.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Nocturnal enuresis is more common in males than in females (almost 2:1). This male
preponderance is particularly true in younger age groups, cases with milder severity, and cases
involving enuresis occurring only at night. Urinary tract infections are frequently associated with
daytime wetting, especially in females. Diurnal incontinence is more common in females than in
males, and the ratio increases with age. The relative risk of having a child who develops enuresis
is greater for previously enuretic fathers than for previously enuretic mothers.
Functional Consequences of Enuresis
The amount of impairment associated with enuresis is a function of the limitation on the child’s
social activities (e.g., ineligibility for sleep-away camp) or its effect on the child’s self-esteem,
the degree of social ostracism by peers, and the anger, punishment, and rejection on the part of
caregivers.
Differential Diagnosis
The diagnosis of enuresis is not made in the
presence of a neurogenic bladder or any other structural condition (such as a posterior urethral
valve or ectopic ureter) or another medical condition that causes polyuria or
402
urgency (e.g., untreated diabetes mellitus or diabetes insipidus) or during an acute urinary tract
infection. However, a diagnosis is compatible with such medical conditions if urinary
incontinence was regularly present prior to the development of another medical condition or if it
persists after the institution of appropriate treatment of the medical condition.
Enuresis may occur during treatment with antipsychotic medications,
diuretics, or other medications that may induce constipation, polyuria, or alterations in executive
functioning, all of which may lead to incontinence. In this case, the diagnosis should not be made
in isolation but may be noted as a medication side effect. However, a diagnosis of enuresis may
be made if urinary incontinence was regularly present prior to treatment with the medication.
Comorbidity
Although most children with enuresis do not have a comorbid mental disorder, the prevalence of
comorbid behavioral and developmental symptoms is higher in children with both diurnal and
nocturnal enuresis than in children without incontinence. Developmental delays, including
speech, language, learning, and motor skills delays, are also present in a portion of children with
enuresis. Encopresis and constipation are present in both day and night incontinence. Restless
legs syndrome and parasomnias such as non–rapid eye movement sleep arousal disorders
