F98.1
(sleepwalking and sleep terror types) are associated with nocturnal enuresis. Additionally, there
is a link between nocturnal enuresis and heavy snoring or sleep apneas. Approximately 50% of
enuretic children with proven sleep-disordered breathing will become dry by undergoing
adenotonsillectomy. Urinary tract infections are more common in children with daytime urinary
incontinence and nonmonosymptomatic nocturnal enuresis, especially the diurnal subtype, than
in those who are continent.
Encopresis
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Repeated passage of feces into inappropriate places (e.g., clothing, floor),
whether involuntary or intentional.
B. At least one such event occurs each month for at least 3 months.
C. Chronological age is at least 4 years (or equivalent developmental level).
D. The behavior is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g.,
laxatives) or another medical condition except through a mechanism involving
constipation.
Specify whether:
With constipation and overflow incontinence: There is evidence of
constipation on physical examination or by history.
Without constipation and overflow incontinence: There is no evidence of
constipation on physical examination or by history.
Subtypes
Feces in encopresis, “with constipation and overflow incontinence” subtype, are
characteristically (but not invariably) poorly formed, and leakage can be infrequent to
continuous, occurring throughout the day and at times during sleep. Only part of the feces is
passed during toileting, and the incontinence resolves after treatment of the constipation.
In the “without constipation and overflow incontinence” subtype, feces are likely to be of
normal form and consistency, and soiling is intermittent. Feces may be deposited in a
403
prominent location. This is usually associated with the presence of oppositional defiant
disorder or conduct disorder or may be the consequence of anal masturbation. Soiling without
constipation is less common than soiling with constipation.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of encopresis is repeated passage of feces into inappropriate places (e.g.,
clothing or floor) (Criterion A). Most often the passage is involuntary but occasionally may be
