intentional. The event must occur at least once a month for at least 3 months (Criterion B), and
the chronological age of the child must be at least 4 years (or for children with developmental
delays, the mental age must be at least 4 years) (Criterion C). The fecal incontinence must not be
exclusively attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., laxatives) or another
medical condition except through a mechanism involving constipation (Criterion D).
When the passage of feces is involuntary rather than intentional, it is often related to
constipation, impaction, and retention with subsequent overflow. The constipation may develop
for psychological reasons (e.g., anxiety about defecating in a particular place, a more general
pattern of anxious or oppositional behavior), leading to avoidance of defecation and excessive
volitional stool retention. Physiological predispositions to constipation include ineffectual
straining or paradoxical defecation dynamics, with contraction rather than relaxation of the
external sphincter or pelvic floor during straining for defecation. Dietary habits (such as
insufficient fluid intake), celiac disease, hypothyroidism, or a medication side effect can also
induce constipation. Once constipation has developed, it may be complicated by an anal fissure,
painful defecation, and further fecal retention. The consistency of the stool may vary. In some
individuals the stool may be of normal or near-normal consistency. In other individuals—such as
those with overflow incontinence secondary to fecal retention—it may be liquid.
Associated Features
The child with encopresis often feels ashamed and may wish to avoid situations (e.g., camp,
school) that might lead to embarrassment. The amount of impairment is a function of the effect
on the child's self-esteem, the degree of social ostracism by peers, and the anger, punishment,
and rejection on the part of caregivers. Smearing feces may be deliberate or accidental, resulting
from the child’s attempt to clean or hide feces that were passed involuntarily. When the
incontinence is clearly deliberate, features of oppositional defiant disorder or conduct disorder
may also be present. Many children with encopresis and chronic constipation also have enuresis
symptoms and may have associated urinary reflux in the bladder or ureters that may lead to
chronic urinary infections, the symptoms of which may remit with treatment of the constipation.
Prevalence
It is estimated that the majority of children older than 4 years with encopresis have the subtype
“with constipation and overflow incontinence.” Encopresis affects 1%–4% of children in high-
income countries, while in some Asian countries (Iran, South Korea, Sri Lanka) a prevalence of
2%–8% has been reported. Encopresis is more prevalent among children ages 4–6 years (> 4%)
than among children ages 10–12 years (< 2%); prevalence is also higher among children who
experience early abuse or neglect and low-income youth.
Development and Course
Encopresis is not diagnosed until a child has reached a chronological age of at least 4 years (or
for children with developmental delays, a mental age of at least 4 years). Inadequate,
404
inconsistent toilet training and psychosocial stress (e.g., entering school, the birth of a sibling)
