may be predisposing factors. Two types of course have been described: a “primary” type, in
which the individual has never established fecal continence, and a “secondary” type, in which the
disturbance develops after a period of established fecal continence. Encopresis can persist, with
intermittent exacerbations, for years.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Painful defecation can lead to constipation and a cycle of withholding behaviors that make
encopresis more likely. Male gender and age prior to adolescence are risk factors for encopresis.
A number of factors are thought to contribute to the development of fecal incontinence,
including anxiety, depression, behavioral disorders, psychological stressors (e.g., bullying, poor
school performance), and lower socioeconomic status.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Differences in food and beverage intake in different cultures, hot climatic conditions in tropical
countries, and psychosocial adversity may influence the incidence of constipation, unexplained
abdominal pain, and fecal retention that lead to encopresis. Parents in some societies may not
seek health services for encopresis because of sociocultural reasons. For example, Turkish and
Moroccan parents in the Netherlands may not report encopresis because of religious concerns
about the impurity of urine and feces.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
In children younger than 5 years, the gender ratio appears to be equal, but encopresis tends to be
more common in boys than in girls among older children, with a ratio that varies globally (in
community and hospital-based studies) from 2:1 (in the United States) to 6:1.
Diagnostic Markers
The diagnosis of encopresis is a clinical diagnosis based on history and physical examination and
generally does not require any diagnostic testing. Detection of a rectal fecal impaction by digital
rectal examination would support the diagnosis of encopresis, with constipation and overflow
incontinence. Although not indicated for the diagnosis of encopresis, an abdominal radiograph
demonstrating a fecal impaction would also support the diagnosis of encopresis, with
constipation and overflow incontinence. Colonic transit testing, which typically involves
ingestion of radiopaque markers followed by abdominal imaging to evaluate colonic transit time,
can help differentiate between encopresis with or without constipation and overflow
incontinence. Abdominal imaging demonstrating retention of radiopaque markers would suggest
encopresis, with constipation and overflow incontinence, while prompt evacuation of radiopaque
markers would support the diagnosis of encopresis, without constipation and overflow
incontinence. In certain children, anorectal manometry testing may be helpful for better
understanding physiological factors that may be contributing to encopresis. Anorectal
manometry allows for evaluation of anorectal function and sensation. In the child with refractory
symptoms or signs suggesting the presence of an underlying medical condition leading to fecal
incontinence, further evaluation may be indicated. Such evaluation is designed to exclude other
medical conditions.
