Sleep-Wake Disorders
The DSM-5 classification of sleep-wake disorders is intended for use by mental
health and general medical clinicians (those caring for adult, geriatric, and pediatric individuals).
Sleep-wake disorders encompass 10 disorders or disorder groups: insomnia disorder,
hypersomnolence disorder, narcolepsy, breathing-related sleep disorders, circadian rhythm sleep-
wake disorders, non–rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep arousal disorders, nightmare disorder,
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder, restless legs syndrome, and
substance/medication-induced sleep disorder. Individuals with these disorders typically present
with sleep-wake complaints of dissatisfaction regarding the quality, timing, and amount of sleep.
Resulting daytime distress and impairment are core features shared by all of these sleep-wake
disorders.
The organization of this chapter is designed to facilitate differential diagnosis of sleep-wake
complaints and to clarify when referral to a sleep specialist is appropriate for further assessment
and treatment planning. The DSM-5 sleep disorders nosology uses a simple, clinically useful
approach, while also reflecting scientific advances in epidemiology, genetics, pathophysiology,
assessment, and interventions research since DSM-IV. The approach taken to the classification
of sleep-wake disorders in DSM-5 can be understood within the context of “lumping versus
splitting.” For example, in some categories (e.g., insomnia disorder), a “lumping” approach has
been adopted (i.e., three categories that were separate in DSM-IV—insomnia with other mental
disorders, insomnia with other medical conditions, and insomnia with other sleep disorders—are
all included in the single insomnia category as specifiers), whereas in other categories (e.g.,
narcolepsy), a “splitting” approach has been taken (i.e., there are four separately coded subtypes
of narcolepsy, such as type 1 with cataplexy or hypocretin deficiency, and type 2 without
cataplexy and either without hypocretin deficiency or hypocretin unmeasured), reflecting the
availability of validators derived from epidemiological, neurobiological, and interventions
research.
Because DSM-5 is intended for use by mental health and general medical clinicians who are
not experts in sleep medicine, DSM-5 presents an effort to simplify sleep-wake disorders
classification and thus aggregates diagnoses under broader, less differentiated labels. In contrast,
the International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition (ICSD-3), elaborates numerous
diagnostic subtypes, reflects the science and opinions of the sleep specialist community, and has
been prepared by and for sleep specialists.
The simpler, less-differentiated approach to the diagnosis of sleep-wake disorders in DSM-5
shows superior interrater reliability, as well as convergent, discriminant, and face validity. The
text accompanying each set of diagnostic criteria provides linkages to the corresponding
disorders included in ICSD-3.
The field of sleep disorders medicine has progressed in this direction since the publication of
DSM-IV. The use of biological validators is now embodied in the DSM-5 classification of sleep-
