wake disorders, particularly for disorders of excessive sleepiness, such as narcolepsy, for which
cerebrospinal fluid hypocretin-1 immunoreactivity values can be diagnostic; for breathing-related
sleep disorders, for which formal sleep studies (i.e., polysomnography) are indicated; and for
restless legs syndrome, which can often coexist with periodic limb movements during sleep,
detectable via polysomnography.
408
Co-Occurring Disorders and Differential Diagnosis
Sleep disorders are often accompanied by depression, anxiety, and cognitive changes that must
be addressed in treatment planning and management. Furthermore, persistent sleep disturbances
(both insomnia and excessive sleepiness) are established risk factors for the subsequent
development of mental illnesses (including substance use and non–substance use disorders) and
other medical conditions. They may also represent a prodromal expression of an episode of
mental illness, allowing the possibility of early intervention to preempt or to attenuate a full-
blown episode.
The differential diagnosis of sleep-wake complaints necessitates a multidimensional
approach, with consideration of possibly coexisting clinical conditions, which are the rule and
not the exception. Sleep disturbances furnish a clinically useful indicator of clinical conditions
that often coexist with depression and other common mental disorders. Prominent among these
comorbidities are breathing-related sleep disorders, cardiac and pulmonary conditions (e.g.,
congestive heart failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), neurodegenerative disorders
(e.g., Alzheimer’s disease), and disorders of the musculoskeletal system (e.g., osteoarthritis).
These disorders not only may disturb sleep but also may themselves be worsened during sleep
(e.g., prolonged apneas or electrocardiographic arrhythmias during REM sleep; confusional
arousals in individuals with major neurocognitive disorder; seizures in individuals with complex
partial seizures). REM sleep behavior disorder is often an early indicator of neurodegenerative
disorders (alpha synucleinopathies) like Parkinson’s disease. For all of these reasons—related to
differential diagnosis, clinical comorbidity, and facilitation of treatment planning—sleep
disorders are included in DSM-5.
Key Concepts and Terms
Four distinct sleep stages can be measured by polysomnography: REM sleep and three stages of
NREM sleep (N1, N2, and N3).
REM sleep, during which the majority of typical story-like dreams occur, occupies about 20%–25% of total sleep.
NREM sleep stage 1 (N1) is a transition from wakefulness to sleep and occupies about 5% of time spent asleep in healthy
adults.
NREM sleep stage 2 (N2), which is characterized by specific electroencephalographic waveforms (sleep spindles and K
complexes), occupies about 50% of time spent asleep.
NREM sleep stage 3 (N3) (also known as slow-wave sleep) is the deepest level of sleep and occupies about 20% of sleep
time in healthy, younger adults.
