These sleep stages have a characteristic temporal organization across the night. N3 tends to occur
in the first one-third to one-half of the night and increases in duration in response to sleep
deprivation. REM sleep occurs cyclically throughout the night, alternating with NREM sleep
about every 80–100 minutes. REM sleep periods increase in duration toward the morning.
Human sleep also varies characteristically across the life span. After relative stability with
large amounts of slow-wave sleep in childhood and early adolescence, sleep continuity and depth
deteriorate across the adult age range. This deterioration is reflected by increased wakefulness
and N1 sleep and decreased N3 sleep. Because of this, age must be considered in the diagnosis of
a sleep disorder in any individual.
Polysomnography is the monitoring of multiple electrophysiological parameters during sleep.
Most polysomnographic studies are conducted during the individual’s usual sleeping hours—that
is, at night. However, daytime polysomnographic studies also are used to quantify daytime
sleepiness. The most common daytime procedure is the multiple sleep
409
latency test, in which the individual is instructed to lie down in a dark room and not resist
falling asleep; this protocol is repeated five times during the day. The amount of time required to
fall asleep (sleep latency) is measured on each trial and is used as an index of physiological
sleepiness.
The following standard terminology for polysomnographic measures is used throughout the
text in this chapter, and other terms provide context for the chapter discussion:
Sleep continuity refers to the overall balance of sleep and wakefulness during a night of sleep. “Better” sleep continuity
indicates consolidated sleep with little wakefulness or fragmentation; “worse” sleep continuity indicates disrupted sleep with
more wakefulness and fragmentation.
Specific sleep continuity measures include sleep latency—the amount of time required to
fall asleep (expressed in minutes); wake after sleep onset—the amount of awake time
between initial sleep onset and final awakening (expressed in minutes); the number of
awakenings; and sleep efficiency—the ratio of actual time spent asleep to time spent in bed
(expressed as a percentage, with higher numbers indicating better sleep continuity).
Sleep architecture refers to the amount and distribution of specific sleep stages. Sleep architecture measures include absolute
amounts of REM sleep and each NREM sleep stage (in minutes), relative amount of REM sleep and NREM sleep stages
(expressed as a percentage of total sleep time), and latency between sleep onset and the first REM period (REM latency).
When the latency to onset of REM sleep is < 15 minutes, the terms sleep-onset REM and sleep-onset REM period are
employed.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
A review of multiple studies found that the symptom of insomnia may increase the risk for
suicidal thoughts, suicidal behavior, and death, even after adjustment for depression, and that
nightmares increase risk for suicidal thoughts and behavior. In one study of college students,
31.3% of those with sleep problems had suicidal thoughts, and conversely, nearly all (82.7%)
individuals with suicidal thoughts had sleep problems. A review and consensus statement of the
American Academy of Sleep Medicine concluded that in teenagers, < 8 hours of sleep is
