Persistent: Symptoms last 3 months or longer.
Recurrent: Two (or more) episodes within the space of 1 year.
Note: Acute and short-term insomnia (i.e., symptoms lasting less than 3 months but
otherwise meeting all criteria with regard to frequency, intensity, distress, and/or
impairment) should be coded as an other specified insomnia disorder.
Note: The diagnosis of insomnia disorder is given whether it occurs as an independent
condition or is comorbid with another mental disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder),
medical condition (e.g., pain), or another sleep disorder (e.g., a breathing-related sleep
disorder). For instance, insomnia may develop its own course with some anxiety and
depressive features without those features meeting criteria for any one mental disorder.
Insomnia may also manifest as a clinical feature of a more predominant mental disorder.
Persistent insomnia is a risk factor for depression, anxiety disorders, and alcohol use
disorder and is a common residual symptom after treatment for these conditions. When
insomnia is comorbid with a mental disorder, treatment may need to target both
conditions. Given these different courses, it is often impossible to establish the precise
nature of the relationship between these clinical entities, and this relationship may
change over time. Therefore, in the presence of insomnia and a comorbid disorder, it is
not necessary to make a causal attribution between the two conditions. Rather, the
diagnosis of insomnia disorder is made with concurrent specification of the comorbid
conditions. A concurrent insomnia diagnosis should only be considered when the
insomnia is sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention; otherwise, no
separate diagnosis is necessary.
Recording Procedures
The specifiers “with mental disorder, including substance use disorders”; “with medical
condition”; and “with another sleep disorder” are available to allow the clinician to note
clinically relevant comorbidities. In such cases, record F51.01 insomnia disorder, with [name of
comorbid condition(s) or disorder(s)] followed by the diagnostic code(s) for the comorbid
conditions or disorders (e.g., F51.01 insomnia disorder, with moderate cocaine use disorder and
trigeminal neuralagia; F14.20 moderate cocaine use disorder; G50.0 trigeminal neuralgia).
411
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of insomnia disorder is dissatisfaction with sleep quantity or quality with
complaints of difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep. The sleep complaints are accompanied by
clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning. The sleep disturbance may occur during the course of another mental disorder or
medical condition, or it may occur independently.
Different manifestations of insomnia can occur at different times of the sleep period. Sleep-
onset insomnia (or initial insomnia) involves difficulty initiating sleep at bedtime. Sleep
maintenance insomnia (or middle insomnia) involves frequent or prolonged awakenings
