throughout the night. Late insomnia involves early-morning awakening with an inability to
return to sleep. Difficulty maintaining sleep is the most common single symptom of insomnia,
affecting about 60% of those with insomnia, followed by early awakening and difficulty falling
asleep, according to a U.S. national sample of health care plan members. A combination of these
symptoms is the most common presentation overall. The specific type of sleep complaint often
varies over time. Individuals who complain of difficulty falling asleep at one time may later
complain of difficulty maintaining sleep, and vice versa. Symptoms of difficulty falling asleep
and difficulty maintaining sleep can be quantified by the individual’s retrospective self-report,
sleep diaries in which information is collected prospectively, or other methods, such as
actigraphy or polysomnography. However, the diagnosis of insomnia disorder is based on the
individual’s subjective perception of sleep or a caretaker’s report. Subjective reports from
individuals with insomnia disorder frequently indicate longer sleep latencies, greater time awake
during the night, and less total sleep time than objective (e.g. polysomnographic) data
demonstrate. The reasons for this discrepancy are not well understood, but disturbances in the
underlying neurophysiology reflective of hyperarousal or cortical activation are believed to play
a role.
Nonrestorative sleep, a complaint of poor sleep quality that does not leave the individual
rested upon awakening despite adequate duration, is a common sleep complaint usually
occurring in association with difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep, or less frequently in
isolation. The precise relationship of isolated nonrestorative sleep to insomnia disorder remains
unclear. The prevalence of isolated nonrestorative sleep has been estimated at about 5% and,
unlike insomnia complaints, is reported more commonly in younger individuals. This complaint
can also be reported in association with another sleep disorder (e.g., breathing-related sleep
disorder). When a complaint of nonrestorative sleep occurs in isolation (i.e., in the absence of
difficulty initiating and/or maintaining sleep or other sleep-wake disorders), a diagnosis of other
specified sleep-wake disorder is made.
Aside from the frequency and duration criteria required to make the diagnosis, additional
guidelines are useful to quantify insomnia severity. These quantitative guidelines, while
arbitrary, are provided for illustrative purpose only. For instance, difficulty initiating sleep is
defined by a subjective sleep latency > 20–30 minutes, and difficulty maintaining sleep is
defined by a subjective time awake after sleep onset > 20–30 minutes. Although there is no
standard definition of early-morning awakening, this symptom involves awakening at least 1
hour before the scheduled time and before total sleep time reaches 6½ hours. It is essential to
take into account not only the final awakening time but also the bedtime on the previous evening.
Awakening at 4:00 A.M. does not have the same clinical significance in those who go to bed at
9:00 P.M. as in those who go to bed at 11:00 P.M. Such a symptom may also reflect an age-
dependent decrease in the ability to sustain sleep or an age-dependent shift in the timing of the
main sleep period. Although these quantitative criteria are frequently employed in research
designs, they do not in their own right reliably distinguish individuals with insomnia from
normal sleepers. Moreover, individuals whose presentations no longer meet subjective diagnostic
criteria for insomnia disorder may continue to show objective disturbance by these parameters,
as well as daytime impairment.
412
