Insomnia disorder involves daytime impairments as well as nighttime sleep difficulties.
These include fatigue or, less commonly, daytime sleepiness; the latter is more common among
older individuals and when insomnia is comorbid with another medical condition (e.g., chronic
pain) or sleep disorder (e.g., sleep apnea). Impairment in cognitive performance may include
difficulties with attention, concentration and memory, and performing complex manual skills.
Associated mood disturbances are typically described as irritability or mood lability and less
commonly as depressive or anxiety symptoms. Not all individuals with nighttime sleep
disturbances are distressed or have functional impairment. For example, sleep continuity is often
interrupted in healthy older adults who nevertheless identify themselves as good sleepers. A
diagnosis of insomnia disorder should be reserved for those individuals with significant daytime
distress or impairment related to their nighttime sleep difficulties.
Associated Features
Insomnia is often associated with physiological and cognitive arousal and conditioning factors
that interfere with sleep. A preoccupation with sleep and distress attributable to the inability to
sleep may lead to a vicious cycle: the more the individual strives to sleep, the more frustration
builds and further impairs sleep. Thus, excessive attention and efforts to sleep, which override
normal sleep-onset mechanisms, may contribute to the development of insomnia. Individuals
with persistent insomnia may also acquire maladaptive sleep habits (e.g., spending excessive
time in bed; following an erratic sleep schedule; napping) and cognitions (e.g., fear of
sleeplessness; apprehensions of daytime impairments; clock monitoring) during the course of the
disorder. Engaging in such activities in an environment in which the individual has frequently
spent sleepless nights may further compound the conditioned arousal and perpetuate sleep
difficulties. Conversely, the individual may fall asleep more easily when not trying to do so.
Some individuals also report better sleep when away from their own bedrooms and their usual
routines.
Insomnia may be accompanied by a variety of daytime complaints and symptoms, including
fatigue, decreased energy, and mood disturbances. Individuals with insomnia disorder may
appear either fatigued or haggard or, conversely, overaroused and “wired.” There may be an
increased incidence of stress-related psychophysiological symptoms (e.g., tension headache,
muscle tension or pain, gastrointestinal symptoms); however, there are no consistent or
characteristic abnormalities on physical examination. Symptoms of anxiety or depression that do
not meet criteria for a specific mental disorder may be present, as well as an excessive focus on
the perceived effects of sleep loss on daytime functioning.
Individuals with insomnia may have elevated scores on self-report psychological or
personality inventories with profiles indicating mild depression and anxiety, a worrisome
cognitive style, an emotion-focused and internalizing style of conflict resolution, and a somatic
focus. Patterns of neurocognitive impairment among individuals with insomnia disorder are
inconsistent, although there may be impairments in performing tasks of higher complexity and
those requiring frequent changes in performance strategy. Individuals with insomnia often
require more effort to maintain cognitive performance.
Prevalence
Population-based estimates vary, depending on the sample and the criteria employed, but
