indicate that, across multiple countries, about one-third of adults report insomnia symptoms,
10%–15% experience associated daytime impairments, and 4%–22% have symptoms that meet
criteria for insomnia disorder, with an average of about 10%. Insomnia disorder is the most
prevalent of all sleep disorders. In primary care settings cross-nationally, approximately 20%–
40% of individuals complain of significant insomnia symptoms. Prevalence rates for medical and
psychiatric populations are significantly higher than those in the general population,
413
especially among individuals with mood, anxiety, and substance use disorders. Forty to fifty
percent of individuals with an insomnia disorder have a comorbid mental disorder. Insomnia is a
more prevalent complaint among women than among men, with a gender ratio of about 1.3:1 in
multinational samples. The gender ratio rises to 1.7:1 after age 45. The prevalence in Norway
among older adolescents (16–18 years) is nearly double in girls compared with boys. Although
insomnia can be a symptom or an independent disorder, it is most frequently observed as a
comorbid condition with another medical condition or mental disorder.
Development and Course
The onset of insomnia symptoms can occur at any time during life, but the first episode is more
common in young adulthood. Less frequently, insomnia begins in childhood or adolescence. In
women, the incidence of new-onset insomnia increases with menopause and may persist even
after other symptoms (e.g., hot flashes) have resolved. Insomnia may have a late-life onset,
which is often associated with the onset of other health-related conditions.
Insomnia can be situational, persistent, or recurrent. Situational or acute insomnia usually
lasts a few days or a few weeks and is often associated with life events or rapid changes in sleep
schedules or environment. It usually resolves once the initial precipitating event subsides. For
some individuals, perhaps those more vulnerable to sleep disturbances, insomnia may persist
long after the initial triggering event, possibly because of conditioning factors and heightened
arousal. The factors that precipitate insomnia may differ from those that perpetuate it. For
example, an individual who is bedridden with a painful injury and has difficulty sleeping may
then develop negative associations for sleep. Conditioned arousal may then persist and lead to
persistent insomnia. A similar course may develop in the context of an acute psychological stress
or a mental disorder. For instance, insomnia that occurs during an episode of major depressive
disorder can become a focus of attention, with consequent negative conditioning, and persist
even after resolution of the depressive episode in at least 40%–50% of individuals. In some
cases, insomnia may also have an insidious onset without any identifiable precipitating factor.
The course of insomnia may also be episodic, with recurrent episodes of sleep difficulties
associated with the occurrence of stressful events. Chronicity rates range from 45% to 75% for
follow-ups of 1–7 years. Even when the course of the insomnia has become chronic, there is
night-to-night variability in sleep patterns, with an occasional restful night’s sleep interspersed
with several nights of poor sleep. The characteristics of insomnia may also change over time.
Many individuals with insomnia have a history of “light” or easily disturbed sleep prior to onset
of more persistent sleep problems.
Insomnia complaints are more prevalent among middle-age and older adults. The type of
