Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
insomnia symptom changes as a function of age, with difficulties initiating sleep being more
common among young adults and problems maintaining sleep occurring more frequently among
middle-age and older individuals.
Difficulties initiating and maintaining sleep can also occur in children and adolescents, but
there are more limited data on prevalence, risk factors, and comorbidity during these
developmental phases of the life span. Sleep difficulties in childhood can result from
conditioning factors (e.g., a child who does not learn to fall asleep or return to sleep without the
presence of a parent) or from the absence of consistent sleep schedules and bedtime routines.
Insomnia in adolescence is often triggered or exacerbated by irregular sleep schedules, especially
phase delay. In both children and adolescents, psychological and medical factors can contribute
to insomnia.
The increased prevalence of insomnia in older adults is partly explained by the higher
incidence of physical health problems with aging. Changes in sleep patterns associated with the
normal developmental process must be differentiated from those exceeding age-related changes.
Older individuals may experience significant delays in sleep onset or frequent awakenings that
are not associated with complaints or daytime consequences. Although
414
polysomnography is of limited value in the routine evaluation of insomnia, it may be more
useful in the differential diagnosis among older adults because comorbid conditions associated
with insomnia (e.g., sleep apnea) are more common in older individuals.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
While the risk and prognostic factors discussed in this section increase vulnerability to insomnia,
sleep disturbances are more likely to occur when predisposed individuals are exposed to
precipitating events, such as major life events (e.g., illness, separation) or less severe but more
chronic daily stress. Most individuals resume normal sleep patterns after the initial triggering
event has disappeared, but others—perhaps those more vulnerable to insomnia—continue
experiencing persistent sleep difficulties. Perpetuating factors such as poor sleep habits, irregular
sleep scheduling, and the fear of not sleeping feed into the insomnia problem and may contribute
to a vicious cycle that may induce persistent insomnia.
Anxiety or worry-prone personality or cognitive styles, increased arousal
predisposition, higher stress reactivity, and tendency to repress emotions can increase
vulnerability to insomnia.
Noise, light, or uncomfortably high or low temperature may increase
vulnerability to insomnia. High altitude may also predispose to insomnia attributable to periodic
breathing difficulties during sleep.
Female sex and advancing age are associated with increased
vulnerability to insomnia. Disrupted sleep and insomnia display a familial disposition. Thirty-
five percent to seventy percent of those with insomnia disorder report one or more first-degree
relatives (most commonly, the mother) with a history of insomnia. Heritability may be highest
for insomnia disorder without comorbidities. The prevalence of insomnia is higher among
monozygotic twins relative to dizygotic twins; it is also higher in first-degree family members
