Course modifiers.
compared with the general population. The extent to which this link is inherited through a
genetic predisposition, learned by observations of parental models, or established as a by-product
of another psychopathology remains undetermined, although sleep reactivity to stress appears to
play some role.
Deleterious course modifiers include poor sleep hygiene practices (e.g.,
excessive caffeine use, irregular sleep schedules).
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Insomnia is a universal human experience. Identification of insomnia as a problem, the
explanatory models for the condition, and associated help-seeking choices are affected by
culture. Insomnia may be understood as a normal part of aging or of stress response, leading to
low help-seeking or to coping via social support and traditional activities such as prayer.
Explanatory models of insomnia vary greatly, including attributions to the effect of the
environment (e.g., humidity) and bodily processes (e.g., poor blood circulation, internal heat)
among others, and may be associated with nonbiomedical treatment-seeking.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
First onset in females is often associated with the birth of a new child or with menopause.
Despite 
higher 
prevalence 
among 
perimenopausal 
and 
postmenopausal 
females,
polysomnographic studies suggest better preservation of sleep continuity and slow-wave sleep in
older females than in older males.
Diagnostic Markers
Polysomnography usually shows impairments of sleep continuity (e.g., increased sleep latency
and time awake after sleep onset and decreased sleep efficiency [percentage of time
415
in bed asleep]) and may show increased stage 1 sleep and decreased stage 3 sleep. The severity
of these sleep impairments does not always match the individual’s clinical presentation or
subjective complaint of poor sleep, as individuals with insomnia often underestimate sleep
duration 
and 
overestimate 
wakefulness 
relative 
to 
polysomnography. 
Quantitative
electroencephalographic analyses may indicate that individuals with insomnia have greater high-
frequency electroencephalography power relative to good sleepers both around the sleep-onset
period and during non–rapid eye movement sleep, although findings vary according to age and
gender. This feature is consistent with increased cortical arousal. Neuroimaging studies have
suggested altered regional brain function consistent with hyperarousal in insomnia, although
interpretation of these findings is complex. Individuals with insomnia disorder may have a lower
sleep propensity and typically do not show increased daytime sleepiness on objective sleep
laboratory measures compared with individuals without sleep disorders.
Other laboratory measures show evidence, although not consistently, of increased arousal
and a generalized activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (e.g., increased cortisol
levels, heart rate variability, reactivity to stress, increased metabolic rate). In general, findings
are consistent with the hypothesis that increased physiological and cognitive arousal plays a
