Normal sleep variations.
Situational/acute insomnia.
significant role in insomnia disorder.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
The symptom of insomnia has been identified as an independent risk factor for suicidal thoughts
and behavior.
Functional Consequences of Insomnia Disorder
Interpersonal, social, and occupational problems may develop as a result of insomnia or
excessive concern with sleep, increased daytime irritability, and poor concentration. Decreased
attention and concentration are common and may be related to higher rates of accidents observed
in individuals with insomnia. Persistent insomnia is also associated with long-term
consequences, including twofold or greater increased risk of new-onset major depressive
disorder, anxiety disorders, and substance use disorders. Insomnia symptoms may also be a risk
factor for relapse of major depressive disorder. Insomnia disorder, especially with objectively
demonstrated short-sleep duration (< 6 hours), is a significant risk factor for numerous
cardiovascular diseases, including hypertension, coronary artery disease/myocardial infarction,
congestive heart failure, and cerebrovascular disease. Increased absenteeism and reduced
productivity at work, reduced quality of life, and increased economic burden are also significant
functional consequences of insomnia disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Normal sleep duration varies considerably across persons. Some
individuals who require little sleep (“short sleepers”) may be concerned about their sleep
duration. Short sleepers differ from individuals with insomnia disorder by the lack of difficulty
falling or staying asleep and by the absence of characteristic daytime symptoms (e.g., fatigue,
concentration problems, irritability). However, some short sleepers may desire or attempt to
sleep for a longer period of time and, by prolonging time in bed, may create an insomnia-like
sleep pattern. Clinical insomnia also should be distinguished from normal, age-related sleep
changes. Insomnia must also be distinguished from sleep deprivation attributable to inadequate
opportunity or circumstance for sleep resulting, for example, from an emergency or from
professional or family obligations forcing the individual to stay awake.
Situational/acute insomnia is a condition lasting a few days to several
weeks, often associated with acute stress due to life events or with changes in
416
sleep schedules. These acute or short-term insomnia symptoms may also produce significant
distress and interfere with social, personal, and occupational functioning. When such symptoms
are frequent enough and meet all other criteria except for the 3-month duration, a diagnosis of
other specified insomnia disorder or unspecified insomnia disorder is made. While the disorder
often remits with subsidence of the stress or adjustment to the change in sleep schedule, some
individuals will develop maladaptive patterns of thought and behavior that result in the
development of a chronic insomnia disorder.
