Delayed sleep phase and shift work types of circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder.
Restless legs syndrome.
Breathing-related sleep disorders.
Narcolepsy.
Parasomnias.
Substance/medication-induced sleep disorder, insomnia type.
Individuals with the
delayed sleep phase type of circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder report sleep-onset insomnia
only when they try to sleep at socially normal times, but they do not report difficulty falling
asleep or staying asleep when their bed and rising times are delayed and coincide with their
endogenous circadian rhythm. This pattern is observed particularly among adolescents and
younger adults. Shift work type differs from insomnia disorder by the history of recent shift
work.
Restless legs syndrome often produces difficulties initiating and
maintaining sleep. However, an urge to move the legs and any accompanying unpleasant leg
sensations are features that differentiate this disorder from insomnia disorder.
Most individuals with a breathing-related sleep disorder have a
history of loud snoring, breathing pauses during sleep, and excessive daytime sleepiness.
Nonetheless, as many as 50% of individuals with sleep apnea may also report insomnia
symptoms, a feature that is more common among women and older adults.
Narcolepsy may cause insomnia complaints but is distinguished from insomnia
disorder by the predominance of symptoms of excessive daytime sleepiness, cataplexy, sleep
paralysis, and sleep-related hallucinations.
Parasomnias are characterized by a complaint of unusual behavior or events during
sleep that may lead to intermittent awakenings and difficulty resuming sleep. However, it is these
behavioral events, rather than the insomnia per se, that dominate the clinical picture.
Substance/medication-induced 
sleep
disorder, insomnia type, is distinguished from insomnia disorder by the fact that a substance (i.e.,
a drug of abuse, a medication, or exposure to a toxin) is judged to be etiologically related to the
insomnia (see “Substance/Medication-Induced Sleep Disorder” later in this chapter). For
example, insomnia occurring only in the context of heavy coffee consumption would be
diagnosed as caffeine-induced sleep disorder, insomnia type, with onset during intoxication.
Comorbidity
Insomnia is a common comorbidity of many medical conditions, including but not limited to
cancer, diabetes, coronary heart disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, arthritis,
fibromyalgia, other chronic pain conditions, degenerative brain diseases, and traumatic brain
injury. The risk relationship appears to be bidirectional: insomnia increases the risk of many of
these medical conditions, and medical problems increase the risk of insomnia. The direction of
the relationship is not always clear and may change over time; for this reason, comorbid
insomnia is the preferred terminology when insomnia coexists with another medical condition
(or mental disorder). Insomnia disorder also coexists with numerous other sleep disorders.
Approximately one in seven individuals with insomnia disorder has moderate to severe
obstructive sleep apnea. Rates of insomnia complaints among individuals with narcolepsy are
estimated to be about 50%.
417
Individuals with insomnia disorder frequently have a comorbid mental disorder, particularly
