F51.11
bipolar, depressive, and anxiety disorders. Persistent insomnia represents a risk factor or an early
symptom of subsequent bipolar, depressive, anxiety, and substance use disorders. Individuals
with insomnia may misuse medications or alcohol to help with nighttime sleep, anxiolytics to
combat tension or anxiety, and caffeine or other stimulants to combat excessive daytime fatigue.
In addition to worsening the insomnia, this type of substance use may in some cases progress to a
substance use disorder.
Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders
The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition (ICSD-3), recognizes three
insomnia diagnoses: chronic insomnia disorder, short-term insomnia disorder, and other
insomnia disorder. DSM-5 insomnia disorder and ICSD-3 chronic insomnia disorder closely
parallel each other with respect to symptom, duration, and frequency criteria; however, unlike
DSM-5, ICSD-3 does not include a separate designation for substance/medication-induced sleep
disorder, insomnia type.
Hypersomnolence Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Self-reported excessive sleepiness (hypersomnolence) despite a main sleep
period lasting at least 7 hours, with at least one of the following symptoms:
1. Recurrent periods of sleep or lapses into sleep within the same day.
2. A prolonged main sleep episode of more than 9 hours per day that is
nonrestorative (i.e., unrefreshing).
3. Difficulty being fully awake after abrupt awakening.
B. The hypersomnolence occurs at least three times per week, for at least 3
months.
C. The hypersomnolence is accompanied by significant distress or impairment in
cognitive, social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The hypersomnolence is not better explained by and does not occur exclusively
during the course of another sleep disorder (e.g., narcolepsy, breathing-related
sleep disorder, circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder, or a parasomnia).
E. The hypersomnolence is not attributable to the physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication).
F. Coexisting mental and medical disorders do not adequately explain the
predominant complaint of hypersomnolence.
Specify if:
With mental disorder, including substance use disorders
With medical condition
With another sleep disorder
