Coding note: The code F51.11 applies to all three specifiers. Code also the
relevant associated mental disorder, medical condition, or other sleep disorder
immediately after the code for hypersomnolence disorder in order to indicate the
association.
Specify if:
Acute: Duration of less than 1 month.
Subacute: Duration of 1–3 months.
Persistent: Duration of more than 3 months.
418
Specify current severity:
Specify severity based on degree of difficulty maintaining daytime alertness as
manifested by the occurrence of multiple attacks of irresistible sleepiness within any
given day occurring, for example, while sedentary, driving, visiting with friends, or
working.
Mild: Difficulty maintaining daytime alertness 1–2 days/week.
Moderate: Difficulty maintaining daytime alertness 3–4 days/week.
Severe: Difficulty maintaining daytime alertness 5–7 days/week.
Recording Procedures
The specifiers “with mental disorder, including substance use disorders”; “with medical
condition”; and “with another sleep disorder” are available to allow the clinician to note
clinically relevant comorbidities. In such cases, record F51.11 hypersomnolence disorder, with
[name of comorbid condition(s) or disorder(s)] followed by the diagnostic code(s) for the
comorbid conditions or disorders (e.g., F51.11 hypersomnolence disorder, with major depressive
disorder; F33.1 major depressive disorder, recurrent, moderate).
Diagnostic Features
Hypersomnolence disorder includes symptoms of excessive quantity of sleep (e.g., extended
nocturnal sleep or long naps), sleepiness, and sleep inertia (i.e., a period of impaired
performance and reduced vigilance following awakening from the regular sleep episode or from
a nap) (Criterion A). Individuals with this disorder generally fall asleep quickly and have a good
sleep efficiency (> 90%). Individuals typically feel sleepiness developing over a period of time,
rather than experiencing a sudden sleep “attack.” Unintentional sleep episodes typically occur in
sedentary situations (e.g., while attending lectures, reading, watching television, or driving long
distances), but in more severe cases they can manifest in high-attention situations such as at
work, in meetings, or at social gatherings. The persistent need for sleep can lead to automatic
behavior (usually of a very routine, low-complexity type) that the individual carries out with
little or no subsequent recall. For example, individuals may find themselves having driven
several miles from where they thought they were, unaware of the “automatic” driving they did in
the preceding minutes.
