About 40% of individuals with hypersomnolence disorder may have sleep inertia (also
referred to as “sleep drunkenness”), and this symptom may help differentiate hypersomnolence
disorder from other causes of sleepiness. They may have difficulty waking up in the morning,
sometimes appearing confused, combative, or ataxic. Individuals may set multiple alarm clocks
or rely on others to help get them out of bed. Sleep inertia can also occur upon awakening from a
daytime nap. During that period, the individual appears awake, but motor coordination is
impaired, behavior may be inappropriate, and memory deficits, disorientation in time and space,
and feelings of grogginess may occur. This period may last some minutes to hours.
For some individuals with hypersomnolence disorder, the major sleep episode (for most
individuals, nocturnal sleep) has a duration of 9 hours or more. In the most extreme cases, sleep
episodes can last up to 20 hours. However, the sleep is often nonrestorative and is followed by
difficulty awakening in the morning. For other individuals with hypersomnolence disorder, the
major sleep episode is of normal nocturnal sleep duration (7–9 hours), and they take relatively
long daytime naps (> 1 hour) that do not improve alertness. Most individuals with
hypersomnolence disorder take daytime naps nearly every day regardless of the nocturnal sleep
duration. While many individuals with hypersomnolence are able to reduce their sleep time
during working days, weekend and holiday sleep is greatly increased (by up to 3 hours).
419
Associated Features
Approximately 80% of individuals with hypersomnolence disorder report that their sleep is
nonrestorative, but this symptom is nonspecific and can occur with disorders that disrupt sleep,
such as obstructive sleep apnea. Naps are often long (> 1 hour) and unrefreshing. Short naps (i.e.,
duration of < 30 minutes) are often unrefreshing. Individuals with hypersomnolence often appear
sleepy and may even fall asleep in the clinician’s waiting area.
A subset of individuals with hypersomnolence disorder have a family history of
hypersomnolence and also have symptoms of autonomic nervous system dysfunction, including
recurrent vascular-type headaches, reactivity of the peripheral vascular system (Raynaud’s
phenomenon), and fainting.
Prevalence
Approximately 5%–10% of individuals in the United States who consult in sleep disorder clinics
with complaints of daytime sleepiness are diagnosed as having hypersomnolence disorder. It is
estimated that about 1% of the European and U.S. general population has episodes of sleep
inertia. Hypersomnolence occurs with relatively equal frequency in men and women.
Development and Course
Hypersomnolence disorder usually begins in late adolescence or early adulthood, with a mean
age at onset of 17–24 years and a gradual progression over weeks to months. Little is known of
the natural history, but for most individuals, the symptoms are persistent and stable, unless
treatment is initiated. Spontaneous remission occurs in about 11%–25% of individuals after 5–7
years. Individuals with hypersomnolence disorder are diagnosed, on average, 10–15 years after
the appearance of the first symptoms. Pediatric cases are rare. The development of other sleep
