Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Normative variation in sleep.
disorders (e.g., breathing-related sleep disorder) may worsen the degree of sleepiness.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Hypersomnolence can be increased temporarily by psychological stress and
alcohol use, but they have not been documented as environmental precipitating factors. Viral
infections have been reported to have preceded or accompanied hypersomnolence in about 10%
of cases. Hypersomnolence is common in the months after traumatic brain injury.
Hypersomnolence may be familial, with an autosomal-dominant mode
of inheritance.
Diagnostic Markers
Nocturnal polysomnography demonstrates a normal to prolonged sleep duration, short sleep
latency, and normal to increased sleep continuity. The nocturnal distribution of rapid eye
movement (REM) sleep is also normal. Sleep efficiency is typically > 90%. The multiple sleep
latency test documents sleep tendency, typically indicated by mean sleep latency values of < 8
minutes. In hypersomnolence disorder, the mean sleep latency is typically < 10 minutes and
frequently 8 minutes or less. Sleep-onset REM periods (i.e., the occurrence of REM sleep within
20 minutes of sleep onset) may be present but occur infrequently. Unfortunately, the multiple
sleep latency test has poor test-retest reliability, and it does not distinguish well between
hypersomnolence disorder and narcolepsy type 2.
420
A 2-week sleep diary can help document amounts and timing of sleep, and actigraphy
provides more accurate data on habitual sleep patterns. In a 32-hour bed rest protocol in which
subjects were encouraged to sleep ad lib, individuals with hypersomnolence disorder slept > 4
hours more than control subjects.
Functional Consequences of Hypersomnolence Disorder
The low level of alertness that occurs while an individual fights the need for sleep can lead to
reduced efficiency, diminished concentration, and poor memory during daytime activities.
Hypersomnolence can lead to significant distress and dysfunction in work and social
relationships. Prolonged nocturnal sleep and difficulty awakening can result in difficulty in
meeting morning obligations, such as arriving at work on time. Unintentional daytime sleep
episodes can be embarrassing and even dangerous, if, for instance, the individual is driving or
operating machinery when the episode occurs.
Differential Diagnosis
“Normal” sleep duration varies considerably in the general
population. “Long sleepers” (i.e., persons who require a greater than average amount of sleep) do
not have excessive sleepiness, sleep inertia, or automatic behavior when they obtain their
required amount of nocturnal sleep. Sleep is reported to be refreshing. If social or occupational
demands lead to shorter nocturnal sleep, daytime symptoms may appear. In hypersomnolence
