Narcolepsy.
Fatigue as a symptom of another mental disorder or medical condition.
Breathing-related sleep disorders.
Circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders.
Parasomnias.
disorder, by contrast, symptoms of excessive sleepiness occur regardless of nocturnal sleep
duration.
An inadequate amount of nocturnal sleep, or behaviorally induced insufficient sleep
syndrome, can produce symptoms of daytime sleepiness very similar to those of
hypersomnolence disorder. An average sleep duration of fewer than 7 hours per night strongly
suggests inadequate nocturnal sleep, yet in the United States, the average adult obtains only 6.75
hours of sleep on typical weeknights. Individuals with inadequate nocturnal sleep typically
“catch up” with longer sleep durations on days when they are free from social or occupational
demands or on vacations. A diagnosis of hypersomnolence disorder should not be made if there
is a question regarding the adequacy of nocturnal sleep duration. A diagnostic and therapeutic
trial of sleep extension for 10–14 days can often clarify the diagnosis.
As in hypersomnolence disorder, individuals with narcolepsy have chronic
sleepiness, but several clinical and laboratory findings help distinguish the disorders. In contrast
to those with hypersomnolence disorder, individuals with narcolepsy tend to sleep 7–8 hours
each day and generally feel refreshed on waking in the morning. Individuals with narcolepsy
generally feel more alert after a 15- to 20-minute nap, whereas those with hypersomnolence
disorder tend to take longer naps, have trouble waking from naps, and do not feel alert afterward.
Individuals with narcolepsy also have varying amounts of cataplexy, hypnagogic hallucinations,
sleep paralysis, and fragmented nocturnal sleep, whereas cataplexy never occurs in
hypersomnolence disorder and the other symptoms are uncommon. The multiple sleep latency
test typically shows more than two sleep-onset REM periods in narcolepsy.
Hypersomnolence 
disorder
should be distinguished from tiredness related to fatigue that may be a symptom of another
mental disorder (e.g., generalized anxiety disorder) or medical condition (e.g., chronic fatigue
syndrome). Unlike hypersomnolence, tiredness is not necessarily relieved by increased sleep and
is unrelated to sleep quantity or quality.
421
Chronic sleepiness is common in breathing-related sleep
disorders. Individuals with hypersomnolence and breathing-related sleep disorders may have
similar patterns of excessive sleepiness. Breathing-related sleep disorders are suggested by a
history of loud snoring, pauses in breathing during sleep, and nonrefreshing sleep. Examination
often reveals obesity, a small airway, and large neck diameter. Hypertension is common, and
some individuals may demonstrate signs of heart failure. Polysomnographic studies can confirm
the presence of apneic events in breathing-related sleep disorder (and their absence in
hypersomnolence disorder).
In contrast to individuals with hypersomnolence disorder,
individuals with specific subtypes of circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder show specific
temporal patterns of symptoms. For example, individuals with delayed sleep phase type often
have sleep inertia and sleepiness in the morning and feel most alert in the evening and night, with
habitually late bedtimes. In contrast, those with advanced sleep phase type become sleepy and go
to bed early in the evening but are alert and wake easily in the early morning.
Parasomnias such as non–REM sleep arousal disorders (sleepwalking/sleep terrors)
