Hypersomnolence in other mental disorders and medical conditions.
or REM sleep behavior disorder rarely produce the prolonged, undisturbed nocturnal sleep or
daytime sleepiness characteristic of hypersomnolence disorder. However, parasomnias such as
nightmare disorder, which may result in significant curtailment of total sleep time, may
conceivably manifest with daytime sleepiness.
Hypersomnolence disorder must
be distinguished from hypersomnolence occurring as a symptom of another mental disorder (e.g.,
major depressive episode, especially episodes with atypical features) or medical condition (e.g.,
certain cancers, multiple sclerosis). If the predominant complaint of excessive sleepiness is
adequately explained by another mental disorder or medical condition, then an additional
diagnosis of hypersomnolence disorder is not warranted. However, if the hypersomnolence is not
adequately explained by a comorbid mental disorder or medical condition (e.g., the severity and
nature of the hypersomnolence far exceed what would be expected with the mental disorder or
medical condition), an additional diagnosis of hypersomnolence disorder is warranted.
Comorbidity
Many individuals with hypersomnolence disorder have symptoms of depression that may meet
criteria for a depressive disorder. This presentation may be related to the psychosocial
consequences of persistent increased sleep need. More than half of individuals with
hypersomnolence disorder have attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder symptoms. Individuals
with hypersomnolence disorder are also at risk for substance-related disorders, particularly
related to self-medication with stimulants. This general lack of specificity may contribute to very
heterogeneous profiles among individuals whose symptoms meet the diagnostic criteria for
hypersomnolence disorder. Neurodegenerative conditions, such as Alzheimer’s disease,
Parkinson’s disease, and multiple system atrophy, may also be associated with hypersomnolence.
Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders
The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition (ICSD-3), differentiates nine
subtypes of “central disorders of hypersomnolence,” including disorders not covered in DSM
such as Kleine-Levin syndrome (recurrent episodes of hypersomnia), hypersomnolence due to a
medical/neurological condition or substance use, and insufficient sleep syndrome.
422
Narcolepsy
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recurrent periods of an irrepressible need to sleep, lapsing into sleep, or
napping occurring within the same day. These must have been occurring at least
three times per week over the past 3 months.
B. The presence of at least one of the following:
