1. Episodes of cataplexy, defined as either (a) or (b), occurring at least a few
times per month:
a. In individuals with long-standing disease, brief (seconds to minutes)
episodes of sudden bilateral loss of muscle tone with maintained
consciousness that are precipitated by laughter or joking.
b. In children or in individuals within 6 months of onset, spontaneous
grimaces or jaw-opening episodes with tongue thrusting or a global
hypotonia, without any obvious emotional triggers.
2. Hypocretin deficiency, as measured using cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
hypocretin-1 immunoreactivity values (less than or equal to one-third of
values obtained in healthy subjects tested using the same assay, or less than
or equal to 110 pg/mL). Low CSF levels of hypocretin-1 must not be observed
in the context of acute brain injury, inflammation, or infection.
3. Nocturnal sleep polysomnography showing rapid eye movement (REM) sleep
latency less than or equal to 15 minutes, or a multiple sleep latency test
showing a mean sleep latency less than or equal to 8 minutes and two or
more sleep-onset REM periods.
Specify whether:
G47.411 Narcolepsy with cataplexy or hypocretin deficiency (type 1):
Criterion B1 (episodes of cataplexy) or Criterion B2 (low CSF hypocretin-1
levels) is met.
G47.419 Narcolepsy without cataplexy and either without hypocretin
deficiency or hypocretin unmeasured (type 2): Criterion B3 (positive
polysomnography/multiple sleep latency test) is met, but Criterion B1 is not met
(i.e., no cataplexy is present) and Criterion B2 is not met (i.e., CSF hypocretin-1
levels are not low or have not been measured).
G47.421 Narcolepsy with cataplexy or hypocretin deficiency due to a
medical condition
G47.429 Narcolepsy without cataplexy and without hypocretin deficiency
due to a medical condition
Coding note: For the subtype narcolepsy with cataplexy or hypocretin deficiency
due to a medical condition and the subtype narcolepsy without cataplexy and without
hypocretin deficiency due to a medical condition, code first the underlying medical
condition (e.g., G71.11 myotonic dystrophy; G47.429 narcolepsy without cataplexy
and without hypocretin deficiency due to myotonic dystrophy).
Specify current severity:
Mild: Need for naps only once or twice per day. Sleep disturbance, if present, is
mild. Cataplexy, when present, is infrequent (occurring less than once per week).
Moderate: Need for multiple naps daily. Sleep may be moderately disturbed.
Cataplexy, when present, occurs daily or every few days.
423
