Severe: Nearly constant sleepiness and, often, highly disturbed nocturnal sleep
(which may include excessive body movement and vivid dreams). Cataplexy,
when present, is drug-resistant, with multiple attacks daily.
Subtypes
A diagnosis of narcolepsy, type 1 (NT1; i.e., with cataplexy or hypocretin deficiency) is most
often based on the presence of recurrent sleepiness and cataplexy (given the limited use of
cerebrospinal fluid [CSF] hypocretin determinations). However, cataplexy can emerge years
following onset of sleepiness. Therefore, some individuals may be initially assigned a diagnosis
of narcolepsy, type 2 (NT2; i.e., without cataplexy and either without hypocretin deficiency or
with hypocretin unmeasured), based on sleepiness and positive multiple sleep latency test
(MSLT) findings, only to be reassigned to a diagnosis of NT1 following emergence of cataplexy.
NT1 established by demonstration of low CSF hypocretin levels may manifest without evidence
of clear cataplexy. Other explanations for excessive daytime sleepiness (e.g., sleep deprivation,
shift work, other sleep disorders) and episodes of sudden loss of muscle tone (e.g., seizures, falls
of other origin, functional neurological symptom disorder [conversion disorder]) should be ruled
out. NT2 is established on the basis of chronic sleepiness and characteristic nocturnal sleep
polysomnography findings (e.g., short REM sleep latency) or MSLT findings showing short
mean sleep latency and two or more sleep-onset REM periods (SOREMPs).
NT1 and NT2 can result from other neurological, infectious, metabolic, and genetic
conditions. Inherited disorders, tumors, and head trauma are the most common causes of
secondary narcolepsy. In other cases, the destruction of hypocretin neurons may be secondary to
trauma or hypothalamic surgery. Head trauma or infections of the central nervous system can,
however, produce transitory decreases in CSF hypocretin-1 levels without hypocretin cell loss,
complicating the diagnosis.
Other etiologies include inflammatory lesions due to multiple sclerosis and acute
disseminated encephalomyelitis, vascular disorders such as stroke, and encephalitis. Autosomal
dominant cerebellar ataxia, deafness, and narcolepsy, or ADCA DN, is a familial degenerative
disorder due to missense mutations of the DNA methyltransferase (DNMT1) gene. Cataplexy
with some degree of sleepiness can be caused by other neurological conditions, including Prader-
Willi syndrome, Niemann-Pick disease type C, Möbius syndrome, and Norrie disease.
Hypocretin deficiency has been reported in Parkinson’s disease as well. NT2-like physiology has
been reported in myotonic dystrophy and Prader-Willi syndrome.
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of narcolepsy are recurrent daytime naps or lapses into sleep that occur
typically daily but that must occur at a minimum of three times a week for at least 3 months
(Criterion A), and are accompanied by one or more of the following: cataplexy (Criterion B1),
hypocretin deficiency (Criterion B2), or characteristic abnormalities on a nocturnal
polysomnogram or on the MSLT (Criterion B3). In most individuals with NT1, the first
symptom to manifest is sleepiness or increased sleep need, followed by cataplexy. Sleepiness is
worse in sedentary circumstances and typically is relieved by brief (10–20 minutes) naps.
NT1 generally manifests with cataplexy, typically brief episodes (seconds up to 2 minutes) of
