sudden, bilateral loss of muscle tone precipitated by emotions. A range of positive emotions can
trigger cataplexy, including those associated with laughter, anticipation, or surprise. Less
commonly, cataplexy can be triggered by negative emotions such as anger and embarrassment.
Muscles affected include those of the neck, jaw, arms, legs, or whole body, resulting in head
bobbing, jaw dropping, or complete falls. Individuals are awake and aware during cataplexy.
Cataplexy should not be confused with “weakness” occurring in
424
the context of athletic activities (physiological) or exclusively after unusual emotional
triggers such as stress or anxiety (suggesting possible psychopathology).
In children and rarely in adults with acute NT1 symptom onset, cataplexy may manifest as
continuous hypotonia rather than episodic bouts of weakness triggered by strong emotions. This
continuous hypotonia may result in gait instability, ptosis, and slack jaw. Superimposed on this
muscle weakness, some individuals may demonstrate phenomena such as tongue protrusion and
grimacing. This static cataplexy is most common within 6 months of a rapid onset.
NT1 is caused by loss of hypothalamic neurons that produce the hypocretin (orexin)
neuropeptides, and CSF hypocretin levels are typically less than one-third of control values (< 
110 pg/mL in most laboratories). Individuals with cataplexy have been shown to have low CSF
hypocretin levels in 85%–90% of cases. In contrast, most individuals with NT2 have normal or
intermediate levels of CSF hypocretin. Thus, hypocretin deficiency is a sufficient diagnostic test
for NT1 (Criterion B2). If CSF hypocretin is measured and not low, an NT2 diagnosis is based
on clinical symptoms (Criterion A) and sleep study data outlined in Criterion B3.
A nocturnal polysomnogram followed by an MSLT is the conventional method for
confirming the diagnosis of both NT1 (if hypocretin testing is unavailable or not feasible) and
NT2 (Criterion B3). These tests must be performed after the individual has stopped all
psychotropic medications (for a duration based on elimination half-life) and obtained adequate
sleep time on a normal sleep-wake schedule (as documented with sleep diaries or, preferably,
actigraphy), ideally for 2 weeks. Notably, the abrupt discontinuation of antidepressants, α-
adrenergic agonist medications, or stimulants or use of these medications during testing can alter
REM sleep physiology.
The MSLT result must be positive for a diagnosis of NT2, showing a mean sleep latency of
≤ 8 minutes plus at least two SOREMPs; specifically, REM sleep must occur in at least two of
the five nap opportunities. Alternatively, a nocturnal sleep-onset REM period (nSOREMP; REM
sleep-onset latency ≤ 15 minutes) during polysomnography is sufficient to confirm the diagnosis
and meets Criterion B3. An nSOREMP is highly specific to NT1 (95%–97%) but only
moderately sensitive (54%–57%). False positive findings of SOREMPs can occur with shift
work, circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders, severe obstructive sleep apnea, medication effects,
and insufficient sleep disorder.
The nocturnal polysomnogram and MSLT are diagnostically limited, especially in NT2.
While reliability of diagnostic MSLT testing is relatively high at 85%–95% for NT1, reliability
for the NT2 diagnosis is poorer. Test-retest reliability may be < 50%. This poor reliability may
be due to day-to-day variability in NT2 physiology and technical aspects of the polysomnogram
and MSLT testing, especially inadequate attention to prior sleep time/schedule and
medication/drug use.
