Normal or intermediate CSF hypocretin levels among individuals with cataplexy symptoms
can decline to undetectable levels over time.
Associated Features
When sleepiness is severe, automatic behaviors may occur, with the individual continuing his or
her activities in a semiautomatic, hazelike fashion without memory or consciousness.
Approximately 20%–60% of individuals experience vivid hypnagogic hallucinations before or
upon falling asleep or hypnopompic hallucinations just after awakening. These hallucinations are
typically visual or auditory, and sometimes tactile. They are distinct from the less vivid,
nonhallucinatory dream-like mentation at sleep onset that occurs in persons with normal sleep.
Approximately 20%–60% of affected individuals experience sleep paralysis upon falling
asleep or awakening, leaving them awake but unable to move or speak. However, many normal
sleepers also report occasional sleep paralysis, especially with stress or sleep
425
deprivation. Individuals with narcolepsy can have a range of nocturnal sleep symptoms,
including disrupted nighttime sleep (frequent, brief awakenings), vivid and realistic dreams,
periodic limb movements of sleep, and REM sleep behavior disorder. Nocturnal eating may
occur. Obesity is common. Individuals may appear sleepy or fall asleep in the waiting area or
during clinical examination. During cataplexy, individuals may slump in a chair and have slurred
speech or drooping eyelids. If the clinician is able to check reflexes during cataplexy (most
attacks are < 10 seconds), reflexes are abolished during whole body cataplexy—an important
finding distinguishing genuine cataplexy from functional neurological symptom disorder
(conversion disorder).
Although IQ testing is generally normal in individuals with narcolepsy, impairments in
working memory and executive functioning have been reported.
Prevalence
Narcolepsy-cataplexy (NT1) affects 0.02%–0.05% of the adult general population worldwide
and has an incidence of 0.74 per 100,000 person-years in the United States. Some prevalence
variation has been reported, including lower rates in Israel and higher rates in Japan than in
Europe and the United States. The true prevalence of NT2 is unknown in part because of
diagnostic variability. Narcolepsy affects both genders fairly equally, but this may vary among
different populations.
Development and Course
Onset occurs most often in childhood and adolescence or young adulthood but rarely in old age.
Peak age at onset is around 15–25 years. Onset can be abrupt or progressive, with cataplexy
developing over years. It has been reported that children presenting with abrupt onset of NT1
symptoms have the highest disease severity but that disease severity in these cases tends to
partially improve in the first few years after onset. Abrupt onset in young, prepubescent children
can be associated with obesity and premature puberty. About 50% of individuals with narcolepsy
diagnosed in adulthood recall symptom onset in childhood or adolescence, highlighting problems
