Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
of diagnostic delays for this condition. Once the disorder has manifested, the course is persistent
and lifelong.
In 90% of cases, the first symptom to manifest is sleepiness or increased sleep, followed by
cataplexy (within 1 year in 50% of cases, within 3 years in 85%). Sleepiness, hypnagogic
hallucinations, vivid dreaming, and REM sleep behavior disorder (vocalizations or complex
motor behavior during REM sleep) are early symptoms. Excessive sleep rapidly progresses to an
inability to stay awake during the day, and to maintain good sleep at night, without a clear
increase in total 24-hour sleep time. In the first months, cataplexy may be atypical, especially in
children, manifesting with a generalized hypotonia rather than with episodic emotionally
triggered weakness. In general, narcolepsy symptoms remain fairly stable but may fluctuate with
life events such as pregnancy and stressors. Exacerbations of symptoms suggest lack of
compliance with medications or development of a concurrent sleep disorder, notably sleep apnea,
which has been identified in about a quarter of individuals with narcolepsy.
Young children and adolescents with narcolepsy often develop aggression or behavioral
problems secondary to sleepiness and/or nighttime sleep disruption. Workload and social
pressure increase through high school and college, reducing available sleep time at night.
Pregnancy does not seem to modify symptoms consistently. After retirement, individuals
typically have more opportunity for napping, reducing the need for stimulants. Maintaining a
regular schedule benefits individuals at all ages.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Individuals with narcolepsy commonly report that they need more sleep than
other family members.
426
Group A streptococcal throat infection, influenza (notably pandemic H1N1
2009), or other winter infections, as well as vaccinations (specifically Pandemrix H1N1
vaccination), may trigger an autoimmune process in some individuals, producing narcolepsy a
few months later. Head trauma and abrupt changes in sleep-wake patterns (e.g., job changes,
stress) may be additional triggers.
Monozygotic twins are 25%–32% concordant for narcolepsy. The
prevalence of narcolepsy is 1%–2% in first-degree relatives (a 10- to 40-fold increase overall).
Narcolepsy is strongly associated with HLA DQB1*06:02 (see “Diagnostic Markers”).
DQB1*03:01 increases, while DQB1*05:01, DQB1*06:01, and DQB1*06:03 reduce risk in the
presence of DQB1*06:02, but the effect is small. Polymorphisms within the T-cell receptor alpha
gene and other immune-modulating genes also modulate risk slightly.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Narcolepsy has been described in many ethnoracial groups and cultural contexts. One study of
1,097 treatment-seeking individuals suggested that among African Americans, more cases may
manifest without cataplexy or with atypical cataplexy (although CSF hypocretin is low), and
with earlier onset compared with non-Latinx Whites. Diagnosis may be further complicated by
the higher presence of obesity and obstructive sleep apnea in this population, which can be
