related to differential exposure to social determinants of health, including food insecurity, food
deserts, and limited access to safe and affordable places for physical activity. Individuals with
narcolepsy often experience sleep paralysis, which may be attributed to supernatural forces (e.g.,
frightening spirit is sitting on the sleeper’s chest) in some cultural contexts, contributing to the
perceived dangerousness of the condition and to help-seeking decisions.
Diagnostic Markers
Nocturnal polysomnography followed by an MSLT is used to confirm the diagnosis of
narcolepsy, especially when the disorder is first being diagnosed and before treatment has begun.
In the presence of clear-cut cataplexy, the polysomnography and MSLT are confirmatory for
NT1. In the absence of cataplexy and hypocretin deficiency (if measured), the MSLT is
diagnostic of NT2. Drug or medication effects (e.g., REM-inhibiting antidepressants or sedating
medications), stimulant withdrawal, prior sleep deprivation, shift work, or severe depression may
result in an inaccurate MSLT result and must be ruled out prior to performance of the MSLT. In
particular, chronically insufficient sleep is common and must be considered.
An nSOREMP is highly specific (approximately 1% positive in control subjects) but
moderately sensitive (approximately 50%) for NT1. In contrast, an nSOREMP was only found in
10%–23% of NT2 persons with normal hypocretin levels, suggesting even lower sensitivity in
this subtype. The MSLT result is considered positive for narcolepsy if it displays an average
sleep latency of ≤ 8 minutes and SOREMPs in two or more naps on a four- or five-nap test. The
MSLT result is positive in 90%–95% of individuals with NT1 versus 2%–4% of control subjects
or individuals with other sleep disorders. As noted, poor test-retest reliability for NT2 precludes
determination of comparable data for NT2. Additional polysomnographic findings among
individuals with narcolepsy often include frequent arousals, decreased sleep efficiency, and
increased stage 1 sleep. Periodic limb movements (found in about 40% of individuals with NT1)
and sleep apnea are often noted.
Hypocretin deficiency is demonstrated by measuring CSF hypocretin-1 levels. The test is
particularly useful in individuals with suspected pseudocataplexy and those without typical
cataplexy, or in treatment-refractory cases. The diagnostic value of the test is not affected by
medications, sleep deprivation, or the time of day or night when it is collected, but the findings
are uninterpretable when the individual is severely ill with a concurrent
427
infection or head trauma or is comatose. CSF cytology, protein, and glucose are within
normal range even when sampled within weeks of rapid onset of the disorder. When measured in
individuals with typical cataplexy symptoms, CSF hypocretin-1 is often already very diminished
or undetectable.
About 85%–95% of individuals with NT1 are positive for the HLA DQB1*06:02 haplotype.
This gene influences immune system antigen presentation, supporting an underlying autoimmune
pathophysiology of NT1. Outbreaks of NT1 after specific vaccinations and infections further
support an autoimmune etiology. In contrast to NT1, there are no biomarkers of NT2. Only about
40%–50% of individuals with NT2 are positive for DQB1*06:02. As 12%–38% of the general
population is DQB1*06:02 positive, testing for this allele is not very helpful for diagnosing NT2
