Other hypersomnias.
Sleep deprivation and insufficient nocturnal sleep.
Sleep apnea syndromes.
Insomnia disorder.
Major depressive disorder.
but can be helpful for screening of NT1.
Functional Consequences of Narcolepsy
School performance, driving, work, or other activities that require sustained attention are
impaired, and individuals with narcolepsy should avoid jobs that place themselves (e.g., working
with machinery) or others (e.g., bus driver, pilot) in danger. Once the narcolepsy is controlled
with therapy, individuals can usually drive, although rarely long distances alone. Untreated
individuals are also at risk for social isolation and accidental injury to themselves or others.
Social relations may suffer as these individuals strive to avert cataplexy by exerting control over
emotions or stimuli that cause emotions.
Differential Diagnosis
Hypersomnolence disorder (also known as idiopathic hypersomnia) and
narcolepsy are similar with respect to the presence of chronic daytime sleepiness, age at onset
(typically adolescence or early adulthood), and stable course over time, but can be distinguished
based on distinctive clinical and laboratory features. Individuals with hypersomnolence disorder
typically have longer and less disrupted nocturnal sleep, greater difficulty awakening, more
persistent daytime sleepiness (as opposed to more discrete “sleep attacks” in narcolepsy), longer
and less refreshing daytime sleep episodes, and little or no dreaming during daytime naps. By
contrast, individuals with NT1 generally have cataplexy. Those with NT1 or NT2 may
demonstrate recurrent intrusions of elements of REM sleep into the transition between sleep and
wakefulness (e.g., sleep-related hallucinations and sleep paralysis). The MSLT typically
demonstrates shorter sleep latencies (i.e., greater physiological sleepiness) as well as the
presence of multiple SOREMPs in individuals with narcolepsy.
Sleep deprivation and insufficient nocturnal sleep
are common in adolescents and shift workers. In adolescents, difficulties falling asleep at night
are common, causing sleep deprivation. The MSLT result may be falsely positive if conducted
while the individual is sleep deprived or while his or her sleep is phase delayed.
Obstructive sleep apnea is common in the general population and can be
present in individuals with narcolepsy due to obesity. Because obstructive sleep apnea is more
frequent than narcolepsy, cataplexy may be overlooked (or absent). Narcolepsy should be
considered in individuals with persistent sleepiness despite treatment of their sleep apnea.
Individuals with narcolepsy may focus on the presence of nocturnal sleep
disruption and incorrectly attribute daytime sleepiness to insomnia disorder. Although
individuals with narcolepsy, like those with insomnia disorder, may experience frequent
awakenings during the night, individuals with narcolepsy typically have no difficulty initiating
sleep or returning to sleep in contrast to those with insomnia disorder.
428
Moreover, insomnia disorder is not typically associated with the severity of daytime sleepiness
observed in narcolepsy.
Excessive daytime sleepiness is a common complaint of both
