Functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder; pseudocataplexy).
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or other behavioral problems.
Atonic seizures.
Syncope.
Chorea and motor disorders.
Schizophrenia.
individuals with major depression and individuals with narcolepsy. The presence of cataplexy
(which is not a feature of major depressive disorder) along with the severity of excessive daytime
sleepiness indicates a diagnosis of NT1 rather than major depressive disorder. Moreover, in
individuals with major depression, MSLT results are most often normal, and there is dissociation
between subjective and objective sleepiness, as measured by the mean sleep latency during the
MSLT. In a meta-analysis of individuals with psychiatric disorders evaluated for sleepiness,
while 25% had a mean sleep latency of < 8 minutes on the MSLT, only rarely were two or more
SOREMPs noted on the MSLT, highlighting the more specific REM sleep dysfunction of
narcolepsy.
Individuals 
with
functional neurological symptom disorder can present with weakness that may raise questions of
cataplexy. However, in functional neurological symptom disorder, the weakness is often long-
lasting, has unusual triggers, and can result in frequent falls. Individuals may report sleeping and
dreaming during MSLT naps, yet the MSLT does not show the characteristic SOREMP. Home
video recordings and video during sleep studies can be helpful to distinguish this condition from
true cataplexy. The weakness is usually generalized in pseudocataplexy, without partial attacks.
Full-blown, long-lasting pseudocataplexy may occur during consultation, allowing the
examining physician enough time to verify reflexes, which remain intact.
In 
children 
and 
adolescents,
sleepiness can cause behavioral problems, including aggressiveness and inattention, leading to a
misdiagnosis of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
Atonic seizures, a type of seizure that causes sudden loss of muscle strength,
must be distinguished from cataplexy. Atonic seizures are not commonly triggered by emotions
and tend to manifest as abrupt falls rather than the slower “melting” quality of cataplexy. Atonic
seizures usually occur in individuals with additional seizure types and have distinct signatures on
the electroencephalogram.
Like syncope, cataplexy usually develops over several seconds, but individuals with
cataplexy do not have presyncopal symptoms of dizziness, tunnel vision, and auditory changes.
In young children, cataplexy can be misdiagnosed as chorea or
pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infections
(PANDAS), especially in the context of a strep throat infection and high antistreptolysin O
antibody levels. Some children may have an overlapping motor disorder close to onset of the
cataplexy.
In the presence of florid and vivid hypnagogic hallucinations, individuals with
narcolepsy may think these experiences are real—a feature that suggests the presence of a true
hallucination characteristic of schizophrenia. However, clear differences have been described in
the pattern of hallucinatory experiences in narcolepsy compared with schizophrenia. Individuals
with narcolepsy tend to report sleep-related multisensory “holistic” hallucinations (visual,
auditory, tactile) rather than the predominantly verbal-auditory sensory mode of individuals with
schizophrenia. Moreover, high-dose stimulant treatment of individuals with narcolepsy may
result in the development of persecutory delusions. If cataplexy is present with hallucinations or
delusions, the first clinical supposition would be that these symptoms are secondary to
narcolepsy before consideration of a co-occurring diagnosis of schizophrenia.
