G47.33
429
Comorbidity
Medical and psychiatric comorbidities are common among individuals with narcolepsy and
include obesity, bruxism, enuresis, precocious puberty (among individuals with pediatric-onset
narcolepsy), mood disorders, and ADHD. Rapid weight gain is common in young children with a
sudden disease onset. Parasomnias (e.g., sleepwalking, REM sleep behavior disorder),
obstructive sleep apnea, restless legs syndrome, and periodic limb movements are common in
individuals who develop narcolepsy. Comorbid sleep apnea should be considered if there is a
sudden aggravation of preexisting narcolepsy.
Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders
The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition (ICSD-3), differentiates two
subtypes of narcolepsy: NT1 (narcolepsy with cataplexy or hypocretin deficiency) and NT2
(narcolepsy without cataplexy or hypocretin deficiency). NT1 secondary to another medical
condition (G47.421) and NT2 secondary to another medical condition (G47.429) are reported in
ICSD-3 as secondary narcolepsy subtypes.
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorders
The breathing-related sleep disorders category encompasses three relatively distinct disorders:
obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, central sleep apnea, and sleep-related hypoventilation.
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Hypopnea
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Either (1) or (2):
1. Evidence by polysomnography of at least five obstructive apneas or
hypopneas per hour of sleep and either of the following sleep symptoms:
a. Nocturnal breathing disturbances: snoring, snorting/gasping, or breathing
pauses during sleep.
b. Daytime sleepiness, fatigue, or unrefreshing sleep despite sufficient
opportunities to sleep that is not better explained by another mental
disorder (including a sleep disorder) and is not attributable to another
medical condition.
2. Evidence by polysomnography of 15 or more obstructive apneas and/or
hypopneas per hour of sleep regardless of accompanying symptoms.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Apnea hypopnea index is less than 15.
