Moderate: Apnea hypopnea index is 15–30.
Severe: Apnea hypopnea index is greater than 30.
Specifiers
Disease severity is measured by a count of the number of apneas plus hypopneas per hour of
sleep (apnea hypopnea index) using polysomnography or other overnight monitoring.
430
Apnea refers to the total absence of airflow, and hypopnea refers to a reduction in airflow.
Overall severity is also informed by levels of nocturnal desaturation and sleep fragmentation
(measured by brain cortical arousal frequency and sleep stages) and degree of associated
symptoms and daytime impairment. However, the exact number and thresholds may vary
according to the specific measurement techniques used, and these numbers may change over
time. Regardless of the apnea hypopnea index (count) per se, the disorder is considered to be
more severe when apneas and hypopneas are accompanied by significant oxygen hemoglobin
desaturation (e.g., when more than 10% of the sleep time is spent at desaturation levels of < 
90%) or when sleep is severely fragmented as shown by an elevated arousal index (arousals per
hour of sleep > 30) or reduced time in deep sleep (e.g., percentage stage N3 [slow-wave sleep] < 
5%).
Diagnostic Features
Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea is the most common breathing-related sleep disorder. It is
characterized by repeated episodes of upper (pharyngeal) airway obstruction (apneas and
hypopneas) during sleep. Each apnea or hypopnea represents a reduction in breathing of at least
10 seconds in duration in adults or two missed breaths in children and is typically associated with
drops in oxygen saturation of ≥ 3% and/or an electroencephalographic arousal. Both sleep-
related (nocturnal) and wake-time symptoms are common. The cardinal symptoms of obstructive
sleep apnea hypopnea are snoring and daytime sleepiness.
Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea in adults is diagnosed on the basis of findings from a
polysomnogram (or sleep testing performed outside of the sleep center, referred to as out of
center sleep testing [OCST]) and symptoms. The diagnosis is based on symptoms of 1) nocturnal
breathing disturbances (i.e., snoring, snorting/gasping, breathing pauses during sleep), or 2)
daytime sleepiness, fatigue, or unrefreshing sleep despite sufficient opportunities to sleep that are
not better explained by another mental disorder and not attributable to another medical condition,
along with 3) evidence by polysomnography (or OCST) of five or more obstructive apneas or
hypopneas per hour of sleep (Criterion A1). Diagnosis can be made in the absence of these
symptoms if there is evidence by polysomnography (or limited OCST) of 15 or more obstructive
apneas and/or hypopneas per hour of sleep (Criterion A2).
Criteria for a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea in children differ from those for
a diagnosis in adults. An obstructive apnea hypopnea index of one or more events per hour or
evidence of obstructive hypoventilation in association with snoring or polysomnographic
evidence of airflow obstruction is used to define thresholds of abnormality in children.
