Polysomnographic findings in children may differ from those in adults in that children may
demonstrate labored breathing; partial obstructive hypoventilation (sustained reductions of tidal
volume due to upper airway flow limitations) with cyclical oxygen desaturations; hypercapnia;
and paradoxical breathing.
Most cases of obstructive sleep apnea remain undiagnosed. Therefore, specific attention to
symptoms of disturbed sleep occurring in association with snoring or breathing pauses and
physical findings that increase risk of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea (e.g., central obesity,
crowded pharyngeal airway, elevated blood pressure) is important to reduce the chance of failure
to diagnose this treatable condition.
Associated Features
Because of the frequency of nocturnal awakenings that occur with obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea, individuals may report symptoms of insomnia. Other common, though nonspecific,
symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea are heartburn, nocturia, morning headaches, dry
mouth, erectile dysfunction, and reduced libido. Individuals may complain of difficulty breathing
while lying supine or sleeping. Hypertension may occur in more than 60% of individuals with
obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea.
431
Arterial blood gas measurements while the individual is awake are usually normal, but some
individuals may demonstrate waking hypoxemia or hypercapnia. This pattern should alert the
clinician to the possibility of coexisting lung disease or hypoventilation. Imaging procedures
may reveal narrowing of the upper airway. Cardiac testing may show evidence of impaired
ventricular function. Arrhythmias such as sinus pauses, frequent atrial and ventricular ectopic
beats, or atrial fibrillation may be present during sleep. Individuals with severe nocturnal oxygen
desaturation may also have elevated hemoglobin or hematocrit values.
Prevalence
Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea is a very common disorder. Prevalence may be particularly
high among men as compared with women, ranging from 2:1 to 4:1; older adults; and certain
racial and ethnic groups. Prevalence varies cross-nationally, partly because of differences in
assessment methods. Because the disorder is strongly associated with obesity, the rise in obesity
rates has resulted in an increased prevalence of this disorder.
In the United States, 13% of men and 6% of women have polysomnographic evidence of 15
or more obstructive apneas or hypopneas per hour of sleep, and 14% of men and 5% of women
have more than 5 obstructive apneas or hypopneas per hour of sleep, plus symptoms of daytime
sleepiness. Gender differences decline in older age, possibly because of increased prevalence in
females after menopause; postmenopausal females are 2.6–3.5 times more likely to have
obstructive sleep apnea compared with premenopausal females.
In the general community, prevalence rates in the United States of undiagnosed obstructive
sleep apnea hypopnea may be very high in elderly individuals. Obstructive sleep apnea also
occurs in children, with an estimated prevalence of 1%–4%; there is no gender difference among
prepubertal children. Children who are obese have higher rates.
