Prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea appears to be higher among African Americans than
among U.S. non-Latinx Whites. An increased prevalence among African Americans, American
Indians, and Hispanics may be related to higher rates of obesity, which can be associated with
differential exposure to social determinants of health, including food insecurity, food deserts, and
limited access to safe and affordable places for physical activity.
Development and Course
The age distribution of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea has several peaks. The first occurs in
children ages 3–8 years when the nasopharynx may be compromised by a relatively large mass
of tonsillar tissue compared with the size of the upper airway. With growth of the airway and
regression of lymphoid tissue during later childhood, there is reduction in prevalence. However,
with the increase of obesity in adolescents, a second peak in prevalence occurs in that age group.
Finally, as obesity prevalence continues to increase in midlife and women enter menopause, rates
of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea further increase. The course in older age is unclear;
prevalence of the disorder may plateau after age 65 years, but in some individuals, severity may
worsen with aging. Polysomnographic results must be interpreted in light of other clinical data.
Significant clinical symptoms of insomnia or hypersomnia should be investigated regardless of
the individual’s age.
Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea usually has an insidious onset, gradual progression, and
persistent course. Typically, the loud snoring has been present for many years, often since
childhood, but an increase in its severity may lead the individual to seek evaluation. Weight gain
may precipitate an increase in symptoms. Although obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea can occur
at any age, it most commonly manifests among individuals ages 40–60 years. Over 4–5 years,
the average apnea hypopnea index increases in adults and older individuals by approximately
two apneas or hypopneas per hour. The apnea hypopnea index is increased and incident
obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea is greater among
432
individuals who are older, who are male, or who have a higher baseline body mass index
(BMI) or increase their BMI over time. Spontaneous resolution of obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea has been reported with weight loss, particularly after bariatric surgery. In children,
seasonal variation in obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea has been observed, as has improvement
with overall growth.
In young children, the signs and symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea may be more
subtle than in adults, making diagnosis more difficult to establish. Polysomnography is useful in
confirming diagnosis. Evidence of fragmentation of sleep on the polysomnogram may not be as
apparent as in studies of older individuals, possibly because of the high homeostatic drive in
young individuals. Symptoms such as snoring are usually parent-reported and thus have reduced
sensitivity. Agitated arousals and unusual sleep postures, such as sleeping on the hands and
knees, may occur. Nocturnal enuresis also may occur and should raise the suspicion of
obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea if it recurs in a child who was previously dry at night. Children
may also manifest excessive daytime sleepiness, although this is not as common or pronounced
as in adults. Daytime mouth breathing, difficulty in swallowing, and poor speech articulation are
