Genetic and physiological.
also common features in children. Children younger than 5 years more often present with
nighttime symptoms, such as observed apneas or labored breathing, than with behavioral
symptoms (i.e., the nighttime symptoms are more noticeable and more often bring the child to
clinical attention). In children older than 5 years, daytime symptoms such as sleepiness and
behavioral problems (e.g., impulsivity and hyperactivity), attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder, learning difficulties, and morning headaches are more often the focus of concern.
Children with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea also may present with delayed growth, failure to
thrive, and developmental delays. Although obesity is a less important risk factor in young
children, it nevertheless contributes to the occurrence of obstructive sleep apnea.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
The major risk factors for obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea are obesity
and male sex. Others include maxillary-mandibular retrognathia or micrognathia, positive family
history of sleep apnea, genetic syndromes that reduce upper airway patency (e.g., Down
syndrome, Treacher Collins syndrome), adenotonsillar hypertrophy (especially in young
children), menopause (in females), and various endocrine syndromes (e.g., acromegaly).
Compared with premenopausal females, males are at increased risk for obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea, possibly reflecting the influences of sex hormones on ventilatory control and body fat
distribution, as well as gender differences in airway structure. Medications for mental disorders
and medical conditions that tend to induce somnolence may worsen the course of apnea
symptoms if these medications are not managed carefully.
Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea has a strong genetic basis, as evidenced by the significant
familial aggregation of the apnea hypopnea index. The prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea is approximately twice as high among the first-degree relatives of probands with
obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea as compared with members of control families. One-third of
the variance in the apnea hypopnea index is explained by shared familial factors. Although
genetic markers with diagnostic or prognostic value are not yet available for use, eliciting a
family history of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea should increase the clinical suspicion for the
disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
There is a potential for sleepiness and fatigue to be reported differently across cultures. In some
groups, snoring may be considered a sign of normal health and thus may not trigger concerns,
leading to underdiagnosis.
433
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Menopause, pregnancy, and polycystic ovarian syndrome increase the risk of obstructive sleep
apnea in females. The transition from premenopause to postmenopause is associated with
increased severity of obstructive sleep apnea. Women may more commonly report fatigue, lack
of energy, or insomnia rather than sleepiness and may underreport snoring.
Diagnostic Markers
