Primary snoring and other sleep disorders.
Central sleep apnea.
Polysomnography provides quantitative data on frequency of sleep-related respiratory
disturbances and associated changes in oxygen saturation and sleep continuity. Validated sleep
measures (e.g., multiple sleep latency test, maintenance of wakefulness test) may identify
sleepiness.
Functional Consequences of Obstructive Sleep Apnea Hypopnea
More than 50% of individuals with moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea report
symptoms of daytime sleepiness. A twofold increased risk of occupational accidents has been
reported in association with symptoms of snoring and sleepiness. Motor vehicle crashes also
have been reported to be as much as sevenfold higher among individuals with elevated apnea
hypopnea index values. Clinicians should be cognizant of state government requirements for
reporting this disorder, especially in relationship to commercial drivers. Reduced scores on
measures of health-related quality of life are common in individuals with obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea. Although the greatest functional impact is observed in the “vitality” domain, severe
obstructive sleep apnea negatively affects general health and physical and social functioning as
well.
Differential Diagnosis
Individuals with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea must
be differentiated from individuals with primary snoring (i.e., otherwise asymptomatic individuals
who snore and do not have abnormalities on overnight polysomnography). Individuals with
obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea may additionally report nocturnal gasping and choking, which
can be confused with the presence of asthma or gastroesophageal reflux. The presence of
sleepiness or other daytime symptoms not explained by other etiologies suggests the diagnosis of
obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, but this differentiation requires polysomnography. Definitive
differential diagnosis between hypersomnolence disorder, central sleep apnea, sleep-related
hypoventilation, and obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea also requires polysomnographic studies.
Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea must be differentiated from other causes of sleepiness,
such as narcolepsy, hypersomnolence disorder, insufficient sleep, and circadian rhythm sleep
disorders. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea can be differentiated from narcolepsy by the
absence of cataplexy, sleep-related hallucinations, and sleep paralysis and by the presence of
loud snoring, gasping during sleep, or observed apneas in sleep. Daytime sleep episodes in
narcolepsy are characteristically shorter, more refreshing, and more often associated with
dreaming. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea shows characteristic apneas and hypopneas and
oxygen desaturation during nocturnal polysomnographic studies. Narcolepsy results in multiple
sleep-onset rapid eye movement (REM) periods during the MSLT. Narcolepsy, like obstructive
sleep apnea hypopnea, may be associated with obesity, and some individuals have concurrent
narcolepsy and obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. A diagnosis of narcolepsy does not exclude
the diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, as the two conditions may co-occur.
434
Central sleep apnea can be distinguished from obstructive sleep apnea by the
presence of repetitive apneas or hypopneas due to reduction or absence of respiratory effort on
