Insomnia disorder.
Panic attacks.
Nocturnal asthma.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Substance/medication-induced insomnia or hypersomnia.
polysomnogram recording. Snoring may be present, although it may be less prominent than
observed in obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea or absent altogether. Individuals with central sleep
apnea often exhibit fragmented sleep and may also complain of daytime sleepiness. Central sleep
apnea is seen most commonly in individuals with congestive heart failure (Cheyne-Stokes
breathing) or neurological disease, or those using opioid medications.
For individuals complaining of difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep or
early-morning awakenings, insomnia disorder can be differentiated from obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea by the absence of snoring and the absence of the history, signs, and symptoms
characteristic of the latter disorder. However, insomnia and obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea
may coexist, and if so, both disorders may need to be addressed concurrently to improve sleep.
Nocturnal panic attacks may include symptoms of gasping or choking during sleep
that may be difficult to distinguish clinically from obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. However,
the lower frequency of episodes, intense autonomic arousal, and lack of excessive sleepiness
differentiate nocturnal panic attacks from obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Polysomnography
(or OCST) in individuals with nocturnal panic attacks does not reveal the typical pattern of
apneas or oxygen desaturation characteristic of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Individuals
with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea do not provide a history of daytime panic attacks.
Nocturnal asthma can often cause sudden awakening from sleep with
symptoms of gasping or choking that are indistinguishable from dyspneic episodes resulting
from obstructive sleep apnea. However, a history of asthma is generally present and
polysomnography (or OCST) does not find evidence of apneas, hypopneas, or oxygen
desaturation indicative of obstructive apnea. Nevertheless, nocturnal asthma and obstructive
sleep apnea can coexist, and this can make it difficult to determine the relative contributions of
each condition.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children may
include symptoms of inattention, academic impairment, hyperactivity, and internalizing
behaviors, all of which may also be symptoms of childhood obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea.
The presence of other symptoms and signs of childhood obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea (e.g.,
labored breathing or snoring during sleep and adenotonsillar hypertrophy) would suggest the
presence of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea and attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder may commonly co-occur, and there may be causal links between
them; therefore, risk factors such as enlarged tonsils, obesity, or a family history of sleep apnea
may help alert the clinician to their co-occurrence.
Substance use and substance withdrawal
(including medications) can produce insomnia or hypersomnia. A careful history is usually
sufficient to identify the relevant substance/medication, and follow-up shows improvement of the
sleep disturbance after discontinuation of the substance/medication. In other cases, the use of a
substance/medication (e.g., alcohol, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, opiates) has been shown to
exacerbate obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. An individual with symptoms and signs consistent
with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea should receive that diagnosis, even in the presence of
concurrent substance use that is exacerbating the condition.
Comorbidity
