Systemic hypertension, coronary artery disease, heart failure, stroke, diabetes, and increased
mortality are consistently associated with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Risk
435
estimates vary from 30% to as much as 300% for moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea. Obstructive sleep apnea and cardiovascular disease are strongly related, and treatment
of obstructive sleep apnea reduces morbidity and mortality of cardiovascular disease. Ethnic and
racialized groups that have not received adequate health care may be at higher risk for undetected
cardiovascular risk factors associated with obstructive sleep apnea. Evidence of pulmonary
hypertension and right heart failure (e.g., cor pulmonale, ankle edema, hepatic congestion) is rare
in obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea and when present indicates either very severe disease or
associated hypoventilation or cardiopulmonary comorbidities. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea
also may occur with increased frequency in association with a number of medical or neurological
conditions (e.g., cerebrovascular disease, Parkinson’s disease). Physical findings reflect the co-
occurrence of these conditions.
As many as one-third of individuals referred for evaluation of obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea report symptoms of depression, with as many of 10% having depression scores
consistent with moderate to severe depression. Severity of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, as
measured by the apnea hypopnea index, has been found to be correlated with severity of
symptoms of depression. This association may be stronger in men than in women.
Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders
The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition (ICSD-3), differentiates 11
subtypes of “sleep-related breathing disorders,” including central sleep apneas (CSAs) (e.g.,
primary CSA, CSA due to a medical/neurological condition, CSA due to a substance or
medication), obstructive sleep apnea (adult and pediatric), and sleep-related hypoventilation
disorders.
Central Sleep Apnea
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Evidence by polysomnography of five or more central apneas per hour of sleep.
B. The disorder is not better explained by another current sleep disorder.
Specify whether:
G47.31 Idiopathic central sleep apnea: Characterized by repeated episodes of
apneas and hypopneas during sleep caused by variability in respiratory effort but
without evidence of airway obstruction.
R06.3 Cheyne-Stokes breathing: A pattern of periodic crescendo-decrescendo
variation in tidal volume that results in central apneas and hypopneas at a
frequency of at least five events per hour, accompanied by frequent arousal.
