G47.37 Central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use: The pathogenesis of
this subtype is attributed to the effects of opioids on the respiratory rhythm
generators in the medulla as well as the differential effects on hypoxic versus
hypercapnic respiratory drive.
Coding note (for G47.37 code only): When an opioid use disorder is present, first
code the opioid use disorder: F11.10 mild opioid use disorder or F11.20 moderate
or severe opioid use disorder; then code G47.37 central sleep apnea comorbid with
opioid use. When an opioid use disorder is not present (e.g., after a one-time heavy
use of the substance), code only G47.37 central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid
use.
436
Specify current severity:
Severity of central sleep apnea is graded according to the frequency of the
breathing disturbances as well as the extent of associated oxygen desaturation
and sleep fragmentation that occur as a consequence of repetitive respiratory
disturbances.
Subtypes
There are several subtypes of central sleep apnea. Idiopathic central sleep apnea (alternatively
termed primary central sleep apnea) and central sleep apnea with Cheyne-Stokes breathing are
characterized by increased gain of the ventilatory control system, also referred to as high loop
gain, which leads to instability in ventilation and PaCO2 levels. This instability is termed
periodic breathing and can be recognized by hyperventilation alternating with hypoventilation.
Individuals with these disorders typically have pCO2 levels while awake that are slightly
hypocapnic or normocapnic. Central sleep apnea may also manifest during initiation of treatment
of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea (termed treatment-emergent central sleep apnea) or may
occur in association with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea syndrome. The occurrence of central
sleep apnea in association with obstructive sleep apnea is also considered to be due to high loop
gain. In contrast, the pathogenesis of central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use has been
attributed to the effects of opioids on the respiratory rhythm generators in the medulla as well as
to its differential effects on hypoxic versus hypercapnic respiratory drive. These individuals may
have elevated pCO2 levels while awake. Individuals receiving chronic methadone maintenance
therapy have been noted to have increased somnolence and depression, although the role of
opioid-induced breathing disorders in causing these problems has not been studied. Similarly,
central apnea due to a medical disorder without Cheyne-Stokes breathing is a result of a
pathological process that affects brain-stem ventilatory control centers.
Specifiers
An increase in the central apnea index (i.e., number of central apneas per hour of sleep) reflects
an increase in severity of central sleep apnea. Sleep continuity and quality may be markedly
impaired with reductions in restorative stages of non–rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep (i.e.,
