decreased slow-wave sleep [stage N3]). In individuals with severe Cheyne-Stokes breathing, the
pattern can also be observed during resting wakefulness, a finding that is thought to be a
prognostic marker for increased mortality.
Diagnostic Features
Central sleep apnea disorders are characterized by repeated episodes of apneas and hypopneas
during sleep caused by variability in respiratory effort. These are disorders of ventilatory control
in which respiratory events occur in a periodic or intermittent pattern. Idiopathic central sleep
apnea is characterized by sleepiness, insomnia, and awakenings due to dyspnea in association
with five or more central apneas per hour of sleep. Individuals with heart failure, stroke, or renal
failure who have central sleep apnea typically have a breathing pattern called Cheyne-Stokes
breathing, which is characterized by a pattern of periodic crescendo-decrescendo variation in
tidal volume that results in central apneas and hypopneas occurring at a frequency of at least five
events per hour. Events are often associated with arousal, but arousals are not required for the
diagnosis. Central sleep apnea observed at high altitude occurs after ascent to high altitude,
generally at least 2,500 meters above sea level. Central and obstructive sleep apneas may coexist;
a diagnosis of central sleep apnea hypopnea requires that central events be > 50% of the total
number of respiratory events.
Alterations in neuromuscular control of breathing can occur in association with medications
or substances, which can cause or exacerbate impairments of respiratory rhythm and ventilation.
Individuals taking medications with these effects may have a sleep-related breathing disorder
that could contribute to sleep disturbances and symptoms such
437
as sleepiness, confusion, and depression. Specifically, chronic use of long-acting opioid
medications is often associated with impairment of respiratory control leading to central sleep
apnea.
Associated Features
Individuals with central sleep apnea hypopneas may present with sleepiness or insomnia. They
may have complaints of sleep fragmentation, including awakening with dyspnea. Some
individuals are asymptomatic. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea can coexist with Cheyne-
Stokes breathing, and thus snoring and abruptly terminated obstructive events may be observed
during sleep.
Physical findings seen in individuals with a Cheyne-Stokes breathing pattern relate to its risk
factors. Findings consistent with heart failure, such as jugular venous distension, S3 heart sound,
lung crackles, and lower-extremity edema, may be present.
Prevalence
The prevalence of idiopathic central sleep apnea is unknown but thought to be rare. The
prevalence of Cheyne-Stokes breathing is high in individuals with depressed cardiac ventricular
ejection fraction. In individuals with an ejection fraction of < 45%, the prevalence has been
reported to range from 15% to 44%. The gender ratio for prevalence in North America, Europe,
