Genetic and physiological.
and Australia is even more highly skewed toward men than for obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea. Prevalence increases with age, and most individuals with the disorder are older than
60 years. Cheyne-Stokes breathing occurs in approximately 20% of individuals with acute stroke
as assessed in Barcelona and Toronto. Central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use occurs in
approximately 24% of individuals taking opioids chronically for nonmalignant pain and similarly
in individuals receiving methadone maintenance therapy as seen in several high-income
countries. Higher opioid doses are associated with greater severity, especially at morphine-
equivalent daily dosages > 200 mg. In children assessed in France and Canada, the prevalence
ranges from 4% to 6%.
Development and Course
Polysomnography parameters for diagnosing central sleep apnea are different for children than
for adults and comprise any of the following: 1) cessation of airflow and respiratory effort for
more than 20 seconds, two breath cycles that are associated with an arousal from sleep, or > 3%
oxygen desaturation; or 2) two breath cycles that are associated with bradycardia.
The onset of Cheyne-Stokes breathing appears tied to the development of heart failure. The
Cheyne-Stokes breathing pattern is associated with oscillations in heart rate, blood pressure, and
oxygen desaturation, and elevated sympathetic nervous system activity that can promote
progression of heart failure. The clinical significance of Cheyne-Stokes breathing in the setting
of stroke is not known, but Cheyne-Stokes breathing may be a transient finding that resolves
with time after acute stroke. Central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use has been documented
with chronic use (i.e., several months).
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Cheyne-Stokes breathing is frequently present in individuals with heart
failure. The coexistence of atrial fibrillation further increases risk, as do older age and male sex.
Cheyne-Stokes breathing is also seen in association with acute stroke and possibly renal failure.
The underlying ventilatory instability in the setting of heart failure has been attributed to
increased ventilatory chemosensitivity and hyperventilation due to pulmonary vascular
congestion and circulatory delay. Central sleep apnea is seen in individuals taking long-acting
opioids. In children, central sleep apnea can be found in
438
individuals with congenital abnormalities, particularly Arnold-Chiari malformation, or comorbid
medical conditions such as gastroesophageal reflux. Rarely, central sleep apnea resulting from a
congenital condition may not manifest until adulthood (e.g., Arnold-Chiari malformation and
congenital central hypoventilation).
Diagnostic Markers
Polysomnography is used to characterize the breathing characteristics of each breathing-related
sleep disorder subtype. Central sleep apneas are recorded when periods of breathing cessation for
longer than 10 seconds occur. Cheyne-Stokes breathing is characterized by a pattern of periodic
crescendo-decrescendo variation in tidal volume that results in central apneas and hypopneas
