Other breathing-related sleep disorders and sleep disorders.
occurring at a frequency of at least five events per hour with the number of central apneas and
hypopneas > 50% of the total number of apneas and hypopneas. The cycle length of Cheyne-
Stokes breathing (or time from end of one central apnea to the end of the next apnea) is about 60
seconds.
Functional Consequences of Central Sleep Apnea
Idiopathic central sleep apnea has been reported to cause symptoms of disrupted sleep, including
insomnia and sleepiness. Cheyne-Stokes breathing with comorbid heart failure has been
associated with excessive sleepiness, fatigue, and insomnia, although many individuals may be
asymptomatic. Coexistence of heart failure and Cheyne-Stokes breathing may be associated with
increased cardiac arrhythmias and increased mortality or cardiac transplantation. Individuals with
central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use may present with symptoms of sleepiness or
insomnia.
Differential Diagnosis
Idiopathic central sleep apnea must be distinguished from other breathing-related sleep disorders,
other sleep disorders, and medical conditions and mental disorders that cause sleep
fragmentation, sleepiness, and fatigue. This is achieved using polysomnography.
Central sleep apnea can be distinguished
from obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea by the presence of at least five central apneas per hour of
sleep. These conditions may co-occur, but central sleep apnea is considered to predominate when
central respiratory events are > 50% of the total number of respiratory events.
Cheyne-Stokes breathing can be distinguished from other mental disorders, including other
sleep disorders, and other medical conditions that cause sleep fragmentation, sleepiness, and
fatigue based on the presence of a predisposing condition (e.g., heart failure or stroke) and signs
and polysomnographic evidence of the characteristic breathing pattern. Polysomnographic
respiratory findings can help distinguish Cheyne-Stokes breathing from insomnia due to other
medical conditions. For example, central sleep apnea due to high-altitude periodic breathing has
a pattern that resembles Cheyne-Stokes breathing but has a shorter cycle time, occurs only at
high altitude, and is not associated with heart failure.
Central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use can be differentiated from other types of
breathing-related sleep disorders based on the use of long-acting opioid medications in
conjunction with polysomnographic evidence of central apneas and periodic or ataxic breathing.
It can be distinguished from insomnia due to drug or substance use based on polysomnographic
evidence of central sleep apnea.
Comorbidity
Central sleep apnea disorders are frequently present in users of long-acting opioids, such as
methadone. Individuals taking these medications have a breathing-related sleep disorder that
could contribute to sleep disturbances and symptoms such as sleepiness,
439
confusion, and depression. While the individual is asleep, breathing patterns such as central
