apneas, periodic apneas, and ataxic breathing may be observed. Obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea may coexist with central sleep apnea, and features consistent with this condition can
also be present (see “Obstructive Sleep Apnea Hypopnea” earlier in this chapter). Cheyne-Stokes
breathing is more commonly observed in association with conditions that include heart failure,
stroke, and renal failure and is seen more frequently in individuals with atrial fibrillation.
Individuals with Cheyne-Stokes breathing are more likely to be older, to be male, and to have
lower weight than individuals with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea.
Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders
The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition (ICSD-3), includes eight
subtypes of central sleep apnea (central sleep apnea with Cheyne-Stokes breathing, central apnea
due to a medical disorder without Cheyne-Stokes breathing, central sleep apnea due to high-
altitude periodic breathing, central sleep apnea due to a medication or substance, primary central
sleep apnea, primary central sleep apnea of infancy, primary central sleep apnea of prematurity,
and treatment-emergent central sleep apnea). As in DSM-5, most of these diagnoses require a
frequency of 5 or more central events per hour of sleep. In addition, ICSD-3 criteria also require
the presence of signs or symptoms (e.g., complaints of insomnia or daytime sleepiness). Central
events must constitute at least 50% of the total number of apneas and hypopneas. Primary central
sleep apnea of infancy and primary central sleep apnea of prematurity have their own distinct
criteria sets that differ from adult forms of central sleep apnea.
Sleep-Related Hypoventilation
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Polysomnograpy demonstrates episodes of decreased respiration associated
with elevated CO2 levels. (Note: In the absence of objective measurement of
CO2, persistent low levels of hemoglobin oxygen saturation unassociated with
apneic/hypopneic events may indicate hypoventilation.)
B. The disturbance is not better explained by another current sleep disorder.
Specify whether:
G47.34 Idiopathic hypoventilation: This subtype is not attributable to any
readily identified condition.
G47.35 Congenital central alveolar hypoventilation: This subtype is a rare
congenital disorder in which the individual typically presents in the perinatal
period with shallow breathing, or cyanosis and apnea during sleep.
G47.36 Comorbid sleep-related hypoventilation: This subtype occurs as a
consequence of a medical condition, such as a pulmonary disorder (e.g.,
interstitial lung disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) or a
neuromuscular or chest wall disorder (e.g., muscular dystrophies, postpolio
syndrome, cervical spinal cord injury, kyphoscoliosis), or medications (e.g.,
