benzodiazepines, opiates). It also occurs with obesity (obesity hypoventilation
disorder), where it reflects a combination of increased work of breathing due to
reduced chest wall compliance and ventilation-perfusion mismatch and variably
reduced ventilatory drive. Such individuals usually are characterized by body
mass index of greater than 30 and hypercapnia during wakefulness (with a pCO2
of greater than 45), without other evidence of hypoventilation.
440
Specify current severity:
Severity is graded according to the degree of hypoxemia and hypercarbia
present during sleep and evidence of end organ impairment due to these
abnormalities (e.g., right-sided heart failure). The presence of blood gas
abnormalities during wakefulness is an indicator of greater severity.
Subtypes
Subtypes of sleep-related hypoventilation include the following:
Idiopathic hypoventilation, also referred to as idiopathic central alveolar hypoventilation, is characterized by reduction of
tidal volume and elevated CO2 during sleep, in the absence of any identifiable comorbidity that would account for the
hypoventilation.
Congenital central alveolar hypoventilation is a rare disorder associated with mutation of the gene PHOX2B. It typically
manifests at birth.
Comorbid sleep-related hypoventilation is due to one of numerous potential comorbidities, including pulmonary disease
(e.g., chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD]), chest wall abnormalities (e.g., kyphoscoliosis), neuromuscular
disease (e.g., amyotrophic lateral sclerosis), and obesity (referred to as obesity hypoventilation), as well as use of
medications or substances, especially opioids.
Diagnostic Features
Sleep-related hypoventilation can occur independently or, more frequently, comorbid with
medical or neurological disorders, medication use, or substance use disorder. Although
symptoms are not mandatory to make this diagnosis, individuals often report excessive daytime
sleepiness, frequent arousals and awakenings during sleep, morning headaches, and insomnia
complaints.
Associated Features
Individuals with sleep-related hypoventilation can present with sleep-related complaints of
insomnia or sleepiness. Episodes of orthopnea can occur in individuals with diaphragm
weakness. Headaches upon awakening may be present. During sleep, episodes of shallow
breathing may be observed, and obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea or central sleep apnea may
coexist. Consequences of ventilatory insufficiency, including pulmonary hypertension, cor
pulmonale (right heart failure), polycythemia, and neurocognitive dysfunction, can be present.
