Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
With progression of ventilatory insufficiency, blood gas abnormalities extend into wakefulness.
Features of a medical condition causing sleep-related hypoventilation can also be present.
Episodes of hypoventilation may be associated with frequent arousals or bradytachycardia.
Individuals may complain of excessive sleepiness and insomnia or morning headaches or may
present with findings of neurocognitive dysfunction or depression. Hypoventilation may not be
present during wakefulness.
Prevalence
Idiopathic sleep-related hypoventilation in adults is very uncommon. The prevalence of
congenital central alveolar hypoventilation is unknown, but the disorder is rare. Comorbid sleep-
related hypoventilation (i.e., hypoventilation comorbid with other conditions, such as COPD,
neuromuscular disorders, or obesity) is more common.
The prevalence of comorbid sleep-related hypoventilation due to obesity in the general
population is estimated to be approximately 0.14%–0.6% based on national obesity rates and
prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea across several countries. Increasing rates of obesity are
associated with increasing prevalence of comorbid sleep-related hypoventilation
441
due to obesity. In individuals referred to a sleep clinic who have a body mass index > 35
kg/m2, prevalence may be as high as 42%.
Development and Course
Idiopathic sleep-related hypoventilation is thought to be a slowly progressive disorder of
respiratory impairment. When sleep-related hypoventilation disorder occurs comorbidly with
other disorders (e.g., COPD, neuromuscular disorders, obesity), disease severity reflects the
severity of the underlying condition, and the disorder progresses as the condition worsens.
Complications such as pulmonary hypertension, cor pulmonale, cardiac dysrhythmias,
polycythemia, neurocognitive dysfunction, and worsening respiratory failure can develop with
increasing severity of blood gas abnormalities.
Congenital central alveolar hypoventilation usually manifests at birth with shallow, erratic, or
absent breathing. This disorder can also manifest during infancy, childhood, and adulthood
because of variable penetrance of the PHOX2B mutation.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Ventilatory drive can be reduced in individuals who are using central nervous
system depressants, including benzodiazepines, opiates, and alcohol.
Idiopathic sleep-related hypoventilation is associated with reduced
ventilatory drive due to a blunted chemoresponsiveness to CO2 (reduced respiratory drive; i.e.,
“won’t breathe”), reflecting underlying neurological deficits in centers governing the control of
ventilation. More commonly, sleep-related hypoventilation is comorbid with another medical
condition, such as a pulmonary disorder, a neuromuscular or chest wall disorder, or
hypothyroidism, or with use of medications (e.g., benzodiazepines, opiates). In these conditions,
