the hypoventilation may be a consequence of increased work of breathing and/or impairment of
respiratory muscle function (i.e., “can’t breathe”) or reduced respiratory drive.
Neuromuscular disorders influence breathing through impairment of respiratory motor
innervation or respiratory muscle function. They include conditions such as amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis, spinal cord injury, diaphragmatic paralysis, myasthenia gravis, Lambert-Eaton
syndrome, toxic or metabolic myopathies, postpolio syndrome, and Charcot-Marie-Tooth
syndrome.
Congenital central alveolar hypoventilation is a genetic disorder attributable to mutations of
PHOX2B, a gene that is crucial for the development of the embryonic autonomic nervous system
and neural crest derivatives. Children with congenital central alveolar hypoventilation show
blunted ventilatory responses to hypercapnia, especially in non–rapid eye movement sleep.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Gender distributions for sleep-related hypoventilation occurring in association with comorbid
conditions reflect the gender distributions of the comorbid conditions. For example, COPD is
more frequently present in men and with increasing age. Contrary to previous data, obesity
hypoventilation is now thought to occur equally between genders, and in some studies there may
be even a slightly greater prevalence in women.
Diagnostic Markers
Sleep-related hypoventilation is diagnosed using polysomnography, which demonstrates sleep-
related hypoxemia and hypercapnia that is not better explained by another breathing-related sleep
disorder. The documentation of 1) increased arterial pCO2 levels to > 55 mmHg during sleep or
2) a ≥ 10-mmHg increase in pCO2 levels (to a level that also exceeds
442
50 mmHg) during sleep in comparison to awake supine values, in each case exceeding 10
minutes’ duration, is the gold standard for diagnosis. However, obtaining arterial blood gas
determinations during sleep is impractical, and non-invasive measures of pCO2 have not been
adequately validated during sleep and are not widely used during polysomnography in adults.
Prolonged and sustained decreases in oxygen saturation (oxygen saturation of < 90% for more
than 5 minutes with a nadir of at least 85%, or oxygen saturation of < 90% for at least 30% of
sleep time) in the absence of evidence of upper airway obstruction are often used as an indication
of sleep-related hypoventilation; however, this finding is not specific, as there are other potential
causes of hypoxemia, such as that due to lung disease.
Children with congenital central alveolar hypoventilation are more likely to have disorders of
the autonomic nervous system, Hirschsprung’s disease, neural crest tumors, and characteristic
box-shaped face (i.e., the face is short relative to its width).
Functional Consequences of Sleep-Related Hypoventilation
The consequences of sleep-related hypoventilation are related to the effects of chronic exposure
to hypercapnia and hypoxemia. These blood gas derangements cause vasoconstriction of the
