Other medical conditions affecting ventilation.
Other breathing-related sleep disorders.
pulmonary vasculature leading to pulmonary hypertension, which, if severe, can result in right-
sided heart failure (cor pulmonale). Hypoxemia can lead to dysfunction of organs such as the
brain, blood, and heart, leading to outcomes such as cognitive dysfunction, polycythemia, and
cardiac arrhythmias. Hypercapnia can depress ventilatory drive, leading to progressive
respiratory failure.
Differential Diagnosis
In adults, the idiopathic variety of sleep-related
hypoventilation is very uncommon and is determined by excluding the presence of lung diseases,
skeletal malformations, neuromuscular disorders, and other medical and neurological disorders
or medications that affect ventilation. Sleep-related hypoventilation must be distinguished from
other causes of sleep-related hypoxemia, such as that due to lung disease.
Sleep-related hypoventilation can be distinguished from
obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea and central sleep apnea based on clinical features and findings
on polysomnography. Sleep-related hypoventilation typically shows more sustained periods of
oxygen desaturation rather than the periodic episodes seen in obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea
and central sleep apnea. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea and central sleep apnea also show a
pattern of discrete episodes of repeated airflow reductions that can be absent in sleep-related
hypoventilation. However, both obstructive and central apneas and hypopneas can occur in
association with sleep-related hypoventilation. In obesity hypoventilation, most individuals will
have comorbid obstructive sleep apnea.
Comorbidity
Sleep-related hypoventilation often occurs in association with a pulmonary disorder (e.g.,
interstitial lung disease, COPD), with a neuromuscular or chest wall disorder (e.g., muscular
dystrophies, post-polio syndrome, cervical spinal cord injury, kyphoscoliosis), with obesity, or,
most relevant to the clinician, with medication use (e.g., benzodiazepines, opiates). Congenital
central alveolar hypoventilation often occurs in association with autonomic dysfunction and may
occur in association with Hirschsprung’s disease. COPD, a disorder of lower airway obstruction
usually associated with cigarette smoking, can result in sleep-related hypoventilation and
hypoxemia. The presence of coexisting obstructive sleep apnea
443
hypopnea is thought to exacerbate hypoxemia and hypercapnia during sleep and wakefulness.
The relationship between congenital central alveolar hypoventilation and idiopathic sleep-related
hypoventilation is unclear; in some individuals, idiopathic sleep-related hypoventilation may
represent cases of late-onset congenital central alveolar hypoventilation.
Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders
The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition (ICSD-3), recognizes six
subtypes of sleep hypoventilation disorders. Congenital central alveolar hypoventilation
syndrome and idiopathic hypoventilation (idiopathic central alveolar hypoventilation in the
ICSD-3) are identically classified in DSM-5 and ICSD-3. However, the ICSD-3 subtypes obesity
