hypoventilation syndrome, sleep-related hypoventilation due to a medication or substance, and
sleep-related hypoventilation due to a medical disorder are subsumed under comorbid sleep-
related hypoventilation in DSM-5. The subtype late-onset central hypoventilation with
hypothalamic dysfunction is not in DSM-5. The DSM-5 approach to classification reflects the
frequent co-occurrence of disorders that lead to hypoventilation and hypoxemia. In contrast, the
classification used in ICSD-3 reflects evidence that there are distinct sleep-related pathogenetic
processes leading to hypoventilation.
Circadian Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A persistent or recurrent pattern of sleep disruption that is primarily due to an
alteration of the circadian system or to a misalignment between the endogenous
circadian rhythm and the sleep-wake schedule required by an individual’s
physical environment or social or professional schedule.
B. The sleep disruption leads to excessive sleepiness or insomnia, or both.
C. The sleep disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, and other important areas of functioning.
Specify whether:
G47.21 Delayed sleep phase type: A pattern of delayed sleep onset and
awakening times, with an inability to fall asleep and awaken at a desired or
conventionally acceptable earlier time.
Specify if:
Familial: A family history of delayed sleep phase is present.
Specify if:
Overlapping with non-24-hour sleep-wake type: Delayed sleep
phase type may overlap with another circadian rhythm sleep-wake
disorder, non-24-hour sleep-wake type.
G47.22 Advanced sleep phase type: A pattern of advanced sleep onset and
awakening times, with an inability to remain awake or asleep until the desired or
conventionally acceptable later sleep or wake times.
Specify if:
Familial: A family history of advanced sleep phase is present.
G47.23 Irregular sleep-wake type: A temporally disorganized sleep-wake
pattern, such that the timing of sleep and wake periods is variable throughout the
24-hour period.
