444
G47.24 Non-24-hour sleep-wake type: A pattern of sleep-wake cycles that is
not synchronized to the 24-hour environment, with a consistent daily drift (usually
to later and later times) of sleep onset and wake times.
G47.26 Shift work type: Insomnia during the major sleep period and/or
excessive sleepiness (including inadvertent sleep) during the major awake
period associated with a shift work schedule (i.e., requiring unconventional work
hours).
G47.20 Unspecified type
Specify if:
Episodic: Symptoms last at least 1 month but less than 3 months.
Persistent: Symptoms last 3 months or longer.
Recurrent: Two or more episodes occur within the space of 1 year.
Delayed Sleep Phase Type
Diagnostic Features
The delayed sleep phase type is based primarily on a history of a delay in the timing of the major
sleep period (usually more than 2 hours) in relation to the desired sleep and wake-up time,
resulting in symptoms of insomnia and excessive sleepiness. When allowed to set their own
schedule, individuals with delayed sleep phase type exhibit normal sleep quality and duration for
age. Symptoms of sleep-onset insomnia, difficulty waking in the morning, and excessive
sleepiness early in the day are prominent.
Associated Features
Common associated features of delayed sleep phase type include a history of mental disorders or
a concurrent mental disorder. Extreme and prolonged difficulty awakening with morning
confusion is also common. Insomnia disorder may develop as a result of maladaptive behaviors
that impair sleep and increase arousal because of repeated attempts to fall asleep at an earlier
time.
Prevalence
The prevalence of delayed sleep phase type is highest in adolescents and young adults, with rates
estimated between 3.3% and 4.6% in Norway and Sweden. Studies of adult prevalence yield
significantly lower rates, estimated to be 0.2%–1.7% in Norway and New Zealand. Although the
prevalence of familial delayed sleep phase type has not been established, a family history of
delayed sleep phase is often present in individuals with delayed sleep phase type.
Development and Course
Course is persistent, with intermittent exacerbations throughout adulthood in some individuals.
