Genetic and physiological.
Although age at onset is variable, symptoms begin typically in adolescence and early adulthood
and persist for several months to years before diagnosis is established. Severity may decrease
with age. Relapse of symptoms is common.
Clinical expression may vary across the life span depending on social, school, and work
obligations. Exacerbation is usually triggered by a change in work or school schedule that
requires an early rise time. Individuals who can alter their work schedules to accommodate the
delayed circadian sleep and wake timing can experience remission of symptoms.
Increased prevalence in adolescence may be a consequence of both physiological and
behavioral factors. Hormonal changes may be involved specifically, as delayed sleep phase is
associated with the onset of puberty. Thus, delayed sleep phase type in adolescents should be
differentiated from the common delay in the timing of circadian rhythms in this age group. In the
familial form, the course is persistent and may not improve significantly with age.
445
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Predisposing factors may include a longer than average circadian
period, changes in light sensitivity, and impaired homeostatic sleep drive. Some individuals with
delayed sleep phase type may be hypersensitive to evening light, which can serve as a delay
signal to the circadian clock, or they may be hyposensitive to morning light such that its phase-
advancing effects are reduced. Genetic factors may play a role in the pathogenesis of familial and
sporadic forms of delayed sleep phase type. A study of unrelated families showing strong
heritability of the disorder described a mutation in the clock gene, CRY1, occurring in about
0.6% of the population, which results in increased inhibition of transcription of the activator
clock genes, CLOCK and BMAL1.
Diagnostic Markers
Confirmation of the diagnosis includes a complete history and use of a sleep diary or actigraph
(i.e., a wrist-worn motion detector that monitors motor activity for prolonged periods; if
measured for at least 7 days, motor activity can be used as a proxy for sleep-wake patterns). The
period covered should include weekends, when social and occupational obligations are less strict,
to ensure that the individual exhibits a consistently delayed sleep-wake pattern. The most
commonly available laboratory-derived phase marker is salivary dim light melatonin onset
(DLMO) time. However, not all individuals with diagnosed delayed sleep phase exhibit delayed
DLMO. An investigation of rigorously diagnosed individuals found that only 57% exhibited
physiological phase delays (as gauged by a DLMO time occurring subsequent to the desired
bedtime), whereas the remaining 43% had DLMO times that occurred before the desired
bedtimes. As noted above, behavior, rather than circadian physiological alteration, may play a
more predominant role in the latter (earlier DLMO) group. Given this, phase markers may
ultimately demonstrate more value for optimization of treatment timing and/or as a measure of
treatment response.
Functional Consequences of Delayed Sleep Phase Type
Excessive early day sleepiness is prominent. Extreme and prolonged difficulty awakening with
