Normative variations in sleep.
Other sleep disorders.
morning confusion (i.e., sleep inertia) is also common. The severity of insomnia and excessive
sleepiness symptoms varies substantially among individuals and largely depends on the
occupational and social demands on the individual.
Differential Diagnosis
Delayed sleep phase type must be distinguished from “normal” sleep
patterns in which a person has a late schedule that does not cause personal, social, or
occupational distress (most commonly seen in adolescents and young adults).
Insomnia disorder and other circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders should
be included in the differential. Excessive sleepiness may also be caused by other sleep
disturbances, such as breathing-related sleep disorders, insomnias, restless legs syndrome, and
medical, neurological, and mental disorders. Overnight polysomnography may help in evaluating
for other comorbid sleep disorders, such as sleep apnea. The circadian nature of delayed sleep
phase type, however, should differentiate it from other disorders with similar complaints.
Comorbidity
Delayed sleep phase type is associated with depressive disorders, personality disorders, somatic
symptom disorder or illness anxiety disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and autism spectrum disorder. In addition, comorbid sleep
disorders, such as insomnia disorder, restless legs syndrome, and sleep apnea, as
446
well as depressive and bipolar disorders and anxiety disorders, can exacerbate symptoms of
insomnia and excessive sleepiness. Delayed sleep phase type may overlap with another circadian
rhythm sleep-wake disorder, non-24-hour sleep-wake type. Sighted individuals with non-24-hour
sleep-wake type disorder commonly also have a history of delayed circadian sleep phase.
Advanced Sleep Phase Type
Specifiers
The presence of a family history of advanced sleep phase type may be indicated with the
specifier “familial.” In the familial form, specific mutations demonstrate an autosomal dominant
mode of inheritance, the course is persistent, and the severity of symptoms may increase with
age. The prevalence of familial advanced sleep phase type has not been established.
Diagnostic Features
Advanced sleep phase type is characterized by sleep-wake times that are several hours earlier
than desired or conventional times. Diagnosis is based primarily on a history of an advance in the
timing of the major sleep period (usually more than 2 hours) in relation to the desired sleep and
wake-up time, with symptoms of early-morning insomnia and excessive daytime sleepiness.
When allowed to set their schedule, individuals with advanced sleep phase type will exhibit
normal sleep quality and duration for age.
