Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Associated Features
Individuals with advanced sleep phase type are “morning types,” having earlier sleep-wake
times, with the timing of circadian biomarkers such as melatonin and core body temperature
rhythms occurring 2–4 hours earlier than normal. When required to keep a conventional schedule
requiring a delay of bedtime, these individuals will continue to have an early rise time, leading to
persistent sleep deprivation and daytime sleepiness. Use of hypnotics or alcohol to combat sleep-
maintenance insomnia and stimulants to reduce daytime sleepiness may lead to substance abuse
in these individuals.
Prevalence
The estimated prevalence of advanced sleep phase type is approximately 1% in middle-age
adults in the United States. Sleep-wake times and circadian phase advance in older individuals
probably account for the higher prevalence in this population.
Development and Course
Onset is usually in late adulthood, although in the familial form, onset can be earlier (during
childhood or early adulthood). The course is typically persistent, lasting more than 3 months, but
the severity may increase depending on work and social schedules. The advanced sleep phase
type is more common in older adults.
Clinical expression may vary across the life span depending on social, school, and work
obligations. Individuals who can alter their work schedules to accommodate the advanced
circadian sleep and wake timing can experience remission of symptoms. Increasing age tends to
advance the sleep phase. However, it is unclear whether the common age-associated advanced
sleep phase type is attributable solely to a change in circadian timing (as seen in the familial
form) or also to age-related changes in the homeostatic regulation of sleep, resulting in earlier
awakening. Severity, remission, and relapse of symptoms are dependent on adherence to
behavioral and environmental treatments designed to control sleep and wake structure and light
exposure.
447
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Decreased late afternoon/early evening exposure to light and/or increased
exposure to early-morning light because of early-morning awakening can increase the risk of
advanced sleep phase type by advancing circadian rhythms. By going to bed early, these
individuals are not exposed to light in the phase delay region of the curve, resulting in
perpetuation of advanced phase. In familial advanced sleep phase type, a shortening of the
endogenous circadian period can result in an advanced sleep phase, although circadian period
does not appear to systematically decrease with age.
Advanced sleep phase type has demonstrated an autosomal dominant
mode of inheritance, including a PER2 gene mutation causing hypophosphorylation of the PER2
protein and a missense mutation in CKI.
