Normal variations in sleep.
Other disorders that cause early-morning awakening.
Diagnostic Markers
A sleep diary and actigraphy are used as diagnostic markers, as described earlier for delayed
sleep phase type.
Functional Consequences of Advanced Sleep Phase Type
Excessive sleepiness associated with advanced sleep phase can have a negative effect on
cognitive performance, social interaction, and safety. Use of wake-promoting agents to combat
sleepiness later in the day or sedatives to inhibit early-morning awakening may increase potential
for substance abuse.
Differential Diagnosis
Behavioral factors such as irregular sleep schedules, voluntary early
awakening, and exposure to light in the early morning should be considered, particularly in older
adults.
Careful attention should be taken to rule out
other sleep-wake disorders (e.g., insomnia disorder), other mental disorders (e.g., depressive
disorders, bipolar disorders), and medical conditions that can cause early-morning awakening.
Comorbidity
Repetitive attempts to resume sleep and the development of maladaptive cognitions and sleep-
related behaviors may result in the development of a comorbid insomnia disorder that requires
clinical attention.
Irregular Sleep-Wake Type
Diagnostic Features
Irregular sleep-wake type is characterized by a lack of discernible sleep-wake circadian rhythm.
The diagnosis of irregular sleep-wake type is based primarily on a history of symptoms of
insomnia at night (during the usual sleep period) and excessive sleepiness (napping) during the
day. There is no major sleep period, and sleep and wake periods across 24 hours are fragmented,
with sleep fragmented into at least three periods during the 24-hour day. The longest sleep period
tends to occur between 2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. and is usually < 4 hours.
Associated Features
A history of isolation or reclusion may occur in association with the disorder and contribute to
the symptoms via a lack of external stimuli to help entrain a normal pattern.
448
Individuals or their caregivers report frequent naps throughout the day. Irregular sleep-wake type
is most commonly associated with neurodegenerative disorders, such as major neurocognitive
disorder, and many neurodevelopmental disorders in children.
