Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Normative variations in sleep.
Other medical conditions and mental disorders.
Prevalence
Prevalence of irregular sleep-wake type in the general population is unknown.
Development and Course
The course of irregular sleep-wake type is persistent. Age at onset is variable, but the disorder is
more common in older adults.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Decreased exposure to environmental light and structured daytime activity can be
associated with a low-amplitude circadian rhythm. Hospitalized individuals are especially prone
to such weak external entraining stimuli, and even outside the hospital setting, individuals with
major neurocognitive disorder are exposed to significantly less bright light.
Neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s
disease, and Huntington’s disease, and neurodevelopmental disorders in children increase the
risk for irregular sleep-wake type.
Diagnostic Markers
A detailed sleep history and a sleep diary (by a caregiver) or actigraphy help confirm the
irregular sleep-wake pattern.
Functional Consequences of Irregular Sleep-Wake Type
Lack of a clearly discernible major sleep and wake period in irregular sleep-wake type results in
insomnia or excessive sleepiness at irregular times of the day. Disruption of the caregiver’s sleep
also often occurs and is an important consideration.
Differential Diagnosis
Irregular sleep-wake type should be distinguished from a voluntary
irregular sleep-wake schedule and poor sleep hygiene, which can result in insomnia and
excessive sleepiness.
Other causes of insomnia and daytime sleepiness,
including comorbid medical conditions and mental disorders or medication, should be
considered.
Comorbidity
Irregular sleep-wake type is often comorbid with neurodegenerative and neurodevelopmental
disorders, such as major neurocognitive disorder, intellectual developmental disorder
(intellectual disability), and traumatic brain injury. It is also comorbid with other medical
conditions and mental disorders in which there is social isolation and/or lack of light and
structured activities.
Non-24-Hour Sleep-Wake Type
