Environmental.
Diagnostic Features
The diagnosis of non-24-hour sleep-wake type is based primarily on a history of symptoms of
insomnia or excessive sleepiness related to abnormal synchronization between the 24-hour light-
dark cycle and the endogenous circadian rhythm. Individuals typically present with periods of
insomnia, excessive sleepiness, or both, which alternate with short
449
asymptomatic periods. Starting with the asymptomatic period, when the individual’s sleep phase
is aligned to the external environment, sleep latency will gradually increase and the individual
will complain of sleep-onset insomnia. As the sleep phase continues to drift so that sleep time is
now in the daytime, the individual will have trouble staying awake during the day and will
complain of sleepiness. Because the circadian period is not aligned to the external 24-hour
environment, symptoms will depend on when an individual tries to sleep in relation to the
circadian rhythm of sleep propensity.
Associated Features
Non-24-hour sleep-wake type is most common among blind or visually impaired individuals
who have decreased light perception. In sighted individuals, there is often a history of delayed
sleep phase and of decreased exposure to light and structured social and physical activity.
Sighted individuals with non-24-hour sleep-wake type also demonstrate increased sleep duration.
Prevalence
Prevalence of non-24-hour sleep-wake type in the general population is unclear, but the disorder
appears rare in sighted individuals. The prevalence in blind individuals in the United States is
estimated to be 50%.
Development and Course
Course of non-24-hour sleep-wake type is persistent, with intermittent remission and
exacerbations as a result of changes in work and social schedules throughout the life span. Age at
onset is variable, depending on the onset of visual impairment. In sighted individuals, because of
the overlap with delayed sleep phase type, non-24-hour sleep-wake type may develop in
adolescence or early adulthood. Remission and relapse of symptoms in blind and sighted
individuals largely depend on adherence to treatments designed to control sleep and wake
structure and light exposure.
Clinical expression may vary across the life span depending on social, school, and work
obligations. In adolescents and adults, irregular sleep-wake schedules and exposure to light or
lack of light at critical times of the day can exacerbate the effects of sleep loss and disrupt
circadian entrainment. Consequently, symptoms of insomnia, daytime sleepiness, and school,
occupational, and interpersonal functioning may worsen.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
In sighted individuals, decreased exposure or sensitivity to light and social and
