Genetic and physiological.
Other circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders.
Depressive disorders.
physical activity cues may contribute to a free-running circadian rhythm. With the high
frequency of mental disorders involving social isolation and cases of non-24-hour sleep-wake
type developing after a change in sleep habits (e.g., night shift work, job loss), behavioral factors
in combination with physiological tendency may precipitate and perpetuate this disorder in
sighted individuals. Hospitalized individuals with neurological and psychiatric disorders can
become insensitive to social cues, predisposing them to the development of non-24-hour sleep-
wake type.
Blindness is a risk factor for non-24-hour sleep-wake type. Non-24-
hour sleep-wake type has been associated with traumatic brain injury.
Diagnostic Markers
Diagnosis is confirmed by history and sleep diary or actigraphy for an extended period.
Sequential measurement of phase markers (e.g., melatonin) can help determine circadian phase
in both sighted and blind individuals.
450
Functional Consequences of Non-24-Hour Sleep-Wake Type
Complaints of insomnia (sleep onset and sleep maintenance), excessive sleepiness, or both are
prominent. The unpredictability of sleep and wake times (typically a daily delay drift) results in
difficulty attending school or maintaining a steady job and may increase potential for social
isolation.
Differential Diagnosis
In sighted individuals, non-24-hour sleep-wake type
should be differentiated from delayed sleep phase type, as individuals with delayed sleep phase
type may display a similar progressive delay in sleep period for several days.
Depressive disorders may result in similar circadian dysregulation and
symptoms.
Comorbidity
Blindness is often comorbid with non-24-hour sleep-wake type, as are depressive and bipolar
disorders with social isolation.
Shift Work Type
Diagnostic Features
Diagnosis is primarily based on a history of the individual working outside of the normal 8:00
A.M. to 6:00 P.M. daytime window (particularly at night) on a regularly scheduled (i.e., non-
overtime) basis. Symptoms of excessive sleepiness at work, and impaired sleep at home, on a
persistent basis are prominent. Presence of both sets of symptoms are usually required for a
diagnosis of shift work type. Typically, when the individual reverts to a day-work routine,
