Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Normative variations in sleep with shift work.
Other sleep disorders.
symptoms resolve.
Prevalence
The prevalence of shift work type is unclear, but the disorder is estimated to affect 5%–10% of
the night worker population in the United States (16%–20% of the workforce). Prevalence rises
with advancement into middle age and beyond.
Development and Course
Shift work type can appear in individuals of any age but is more prevalent in individuals older
than 50 years and typically worsens with the passage of time if the disruptive work schedule
persists. Although older adults may show similar rates of circadian phase adjustment to a change
in routine as do younger adults, they appear to experience significantly more sleep disruption as
a consequence of the circadian phase shift.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Predisposing factors include a morning-type disposition and a need for long (i.e.,
more than 8 hours) sleep durations in order to feel well rested.
Trying to balance strong competing social and domestic needs (e.g., in parents of
young children) can lead to the development of the shift work type. Persons who are able to
commit to a nocturnal lifestyle, with few competing day-oriented demands, appear at lower risk
for shift work type.
451
Because shift workers are more likely than day workers to be obese,
obstructive sleep apnea may be present and may exacerbate the symptoms.
Diagnostic Markers
A history and sleep diary or actigraphy may be useful in diagnosis, as discussed earlier for
delayed sleep phase type.
Functional Consequences of Shift Work Type
Individuals with shift work type not only may perform poorly at work but also appear to be at
risk for accidents both at work and on the drive home. Individuals with a history of bipolar
disorder are particularly vulnerable to shift work type–related episodes of mania resulting from
missed nights of sleep. Shift work type often results in interpersonal problems.
Differential Diagnosis
The diagnosis of shift work type, as opposed to the
“normal” difficulties of shift work, depends to some extent on the severity of symptoms and/or
level of distress experienced by the individual.
The presence of shift work type symptoms even when the individual is able
