Jet lag.
to live on a day-oriented routine for several weeks at a time may suggest the presence of other
sleep disorders, such as sleep apnea, insomnia, and narcolepsy, which should be ruled out.
Individuals who travel across many time zones on a very frequent basis may experience
effects similar to those experienced by individuals with shift work type who work rotating shifts.
The distinction should be clear, based on the travel history.
Comorbidity
Shift work type has been associated with increased alcohol use disorder, other substance use
disorders, and depression. A variety of physical health disorders (e.g., gastrointestinal disorders,
cardiovascular disease, diabetes, cancer) have been found to be associated with prolonged
exposure to shift work.
Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders
The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition, circadian rhythm sleep-wake
disorders closely parallel DSM-5 but also include jet lag type.
Parasomnias
Parasomnias are disorders characterized by abnormal behavioral, experiential, or physiological
events occurring in association with sleep, specific sleep stages, or sleep-wake transitions. The
most common parasomnias are non–rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep arousal disorders and
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder. These conditions each have distinct
pathophysiology, clinical characteristics, and prognostic and therapeutic considerations discussed
in the following sections specific to each disorder.
452
Non–Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Arousal Disorders
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recurrent episodes of incomplete awakening from sleep, usually occurring
during the first third of the major sleep episode, accompanied by either one of
the following:
1. Sleepwalking: Repeated episodes of rising from bed during sleep and
walking about. While sleepwalking, the individual has a blank, staring face; is
relatively unresponsive to the efforts of others to communicate with him or
her; and can be awakened only with great difficulty.
2. Sleep terrors: Recurrent episodes of abrupt terror arousals from sleep,
