usually beginning with a panicky scream. There is intense fear and signs of
autonomic arousal, such as mydriasis, tachycardia, rapid breathing, and
sweating, during each episode. There is relative unresponsiveness to efforts
of others to comfort the individual during the episodes.
B. No or little (e.g., only a single visual scene) dream imagery is recalled.
C. Amnesia for the episodes is present.
D. The episodes cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
E. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication).
F. Coexisting mental disorders and medical conditions do not explain the episodes
of sleepwalking or sleep terrors.
Specify whether:
F51.3 Sleepwalking type
Specify if:
With sleep-related eating
With sleep-related sexual behavior (sexsomnia)
F51.4 Sleep terror type
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of non–rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep arousal disorders is the repeated
occurrence of incomplete arousals, usually beginning during the first third of the major sleep
episode (Criterion A), that typically are brief, lasting 1–10 minutes, but may be protracted,
lasting up to 1 hour. The maximum duration of an event is unknown. The eyes are typically open
during these events. Many individuals exhibit both subtypes of arousal (i.e., sleepwalking type
and sleep terror type) on different occasions, which underscores the unitary underlying
pathophysiology. The subtypes reflect varying degrees of simultaneous occurrence of
wakefulness and NREM sleep, resulting in complex behaviors arising from sleep with varying
degrees of conscious awareness, motor activity, and autonomic activation.
The essential feature of sleepwalking is repeated episodes of complex motor behavior
initiated during sleep, including rising from bed and walking about (Criterion A1). Sleepwalking
episodes begin during any stage of NREM sleep, most commonly during slow-wave sleep and
therefore most often occurring during the first third of the night. During episodes, the individual
has reduced alertness and responsiveness, a blank stare, and relative unresponsiveness to
communication with others or efforts by others to awaken the individual. If awakened during the
episode (or on awakening the following morning), the
453
individual has limited recall for the episode. After the episode, there may initially be a brief
period of confusion or difficulty orienting, followed by full recovery of cognitive function and
appropriate behavior.
