The essential feature of sleep terrors is the repeated occurrence of precipitous awakenings
from sleep, usually beginning with a panicky scream or cry (Criterion A2). Sleep terrors usually
begin during the first third of the major sleep episode and last 1–10 minutes, but they may last
considerably longer, particularly in children. The episodes are accompanied by impressive
autonomic arousal and behavioral manifestations of intense fear. During an episode, the
individual is difficult to awaken or comfort. If the individual awakens after the sleep terror, little
or none of the dream, or only fragmentary, single images, are recalled. During a typical episode
of sleep terrors, the individual abruptly sits up in bed screaming or crying, with a frightened
expression and autonomic signs of intense anxiety (e.g., tachycardia, rapid breathing, sweating,
dilation of the pupils). The individual may be inconsolable and is usually unresponsive to the
efforts of others to awaken or comfort him or her. Sleep terrors are also called “night terrors” or
“pavor nocturnus.”
For both subtypes of NREM sleep arousal disorders, the determination of “disorder” depends
on a number of factors, which may vary on an individual basis and will depend on the frequency
of events, potential for violence or injurious behaviors, embarrassment, or disruption/distress of
other household members. Severity determination is best made based on the nature or
consequence of the behaviors rather than simply on frequency.
Associated Features
Sleepwalking episodes can include a wide variety of behaviors. Episodes may begin with
confusion: the individual may simply sit up in bed, look about, or pick at the blanket or sheet.
This behavior then becomes progressively complex. The individual may actually leave the bed
and walk into closets, out of the room, and even out of buildings. Individuals may use the
bathroom, eat, talk, or engage in more complex behaviors. Running and frantic attempts to
escape some apparent threat can also occur. Most behaviors during sleepwalking episodes are
routine and of low complexity. However, cases of unlocking doors and even operating
machinery (driving an automobile) have been reported. Sleepwalking can also include
inappropriate behavior (e.g., commonly, urinating in a closet or wastebasket). Most episodes last
for several minutes to a half hour but may be more protracted. Inasmuch as sleep is a state of
relative analgesia, painful injuries sustained during sleepwalking may not be appreciated until
awakening after the fact.
There are two “specialized” forms of sleepwalking: sleep-related eating behavior and sleep-
related sexual behavior (sexsomnia or sleep sex). Individuals with sleep-related eating
experience unwanted recurrent episodes of eating with varying degrees of amnesia, ranging from
no awareness to full awareness without the ability to avoid or stop eating. During these episodes,
inappropriate foods or even nonfood items (i.e., candy wrappers, small food boxes, or even small
toys) may be ingested. Individuals with sleep-related eating disorder may find evidence of their
eating only the next morning. In sexsomnia, varying degrees of sexual activity (e.g.,
masturbation, fondling, groping, sexual intercourse) occur as complex behaviors arising from
sleep without conscious awareness. This condition is more common in males and may result in
serious interpersonal relationship problems or medicolegal consequences.
During a typical episode of sleep terrors, there is often a sense of overwhelming dread, with a
compulsion to escape. Although fragmentary vivid dream images may occur, a storylike dream
sequence (as in nightmares) is not reported. Most commonly, the individual does not awaken
