Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
fully, but returns to sleep and has amnesia for the episode on awakening the next morning.
Usually only one episode will occur on any one night. Occasionally, several episodes may occur
at intervals throughout the night. These events rarely arise during daytime naps.
454
Prevalence
Isolated or infrequent NREM sleep arousal behaviors are very common in the general population
worldwide. From 10% to 30% of children have had at least one episode of sleepwalking, and the
cross-national 12-month prevalence rate for sleepwalking in children is approximately 5%. The
prevalence of sleepwalking episodes (not sleepwalking disorder) is estimated to be 12%–14.5%
of children in Canada and 1.0%–7.0% among adults in the United Kingdom, with weekly to
monthly episodes occurring in just 0.5%–0.7% of adults. Estimates for the lifetime prevalence of
sleepwalking overall range from approximately 6.9% to 29.2% around the world, with a past-
year prevalence of sleepwalking of 1.5%–3.6% in adults.
The prevalence of sleep terror disorder in the general population is unknown. The prevalence
of sleep terror episodes (as opposed to sleep terror disorder, in which there is recurrence and
distress or impairment) is approximately 34.4%–36.9% at 18 months of age and 19.7% at 30
months of age in Canadian toddlers, and 2.2% in Canadian and British adults.
Development and Course
NREM sleep arousal disorders occur most commonly in childhood and diminish in frequency
with increasing age. Sleepwalking and sleep terrors are frequently outgrown following infancy
and childhood and become less frequent by adolescence, with remission rates between 50% and
65%; for individuals ages 10–18 years, frequency is reported at 1.1% for sleepwalking and 0.6%
for sleep terrors.
Violent or sexual activity during sleepwalking episodes is more likely to occur in adults. The
onset of sleepwalking in adults with no history of sleepwalking as children should prompt a
search for specific etiologies, such as obstructive sleep apnea, nocturnal seizures, or effect of
medication.
Older children and adults may provide a more detailed recollection of fearful images
associated with sleep terrors than do younger children, who are more likely to have complete
amnesia or report only a vague sense of fear.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Sedative use, sleep deprivation, sleep-wake schedule disruptions, fatigue, and
physical or emotional stress increase the likelihood of episodes. Fever and sleep deprivation can
produce an increased frequency of NREM sleep arousal disorders.
A family history of sleepwalking or sleep terrors may occur in up to
80% of individuals who sleepwalk. The risk for sleepwalking is further increased (to as much as
60% of offspring) when both parents have a history of the disorder. Familial aggregation of sleep
terrors and sleepwalking has been described, as parental sleepwalking history predicts incident
and persistent sleep terrors in their offspring. Individuals with sleep terrors frequently have a
