positive family history of either sleep terrors or sleepwalking, with as high as a 10-fold increase
in the prevalence of the disorder among first-degree biological relatives. Sleep terrors are much
more common in monozygotic twins as compared with dizygotic twins. The exact mode of
inheritance is unknown.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Eating during sleepwalking episodes is more commonly seen in women. Sleepwalking occurs
more often in girls during childhood but more often in men during adulthood.
Among children, sleep terrors are more common in boys than in girls. Among adults, they are
equally common in men and women.
455
Diagnostic Markers
NREM sleep arousal disorders arise from any stage of NREM sleep but most commonly from
deep NREM sleep (slow-wave sleep). They are most likely to appear in the first third of the night
and do not commonly occur during daytime naps. During the episode, the polysomnogram may
be obscured with movement artifact. In the absence of such artifact, the electroencephalogram
(EEG) may show a variety of patterns, including continuation of rhythmic delta activity into
awakening, indicating partial or incomplete arousal; or alternatively, theta, alpha, or mixed
frequency EEG activity may be seen during the episode, with frequent mixed slow/mixed
frequency EEG arousals during slow-wave sleep being more common in individuals with NREM
sleep arousal disorders than in control subjects. In distinction to an epileptic seizure, NREM
sleep parasomnia disorders of arousal do not show features of spatiotemporal evolution of EEG
rhythms during the episode.
Polysomnography in conjunction with audiovisual monitoring can be used to document
episodes of sleepwalking. In the absence of actually capturing an event during a
polysomnographic recording, there are no reliable polysomnographic features that can serve as a
marker for sleepwalking. Sleep deprivation may increase the likelihood of capturing an event. As
a group, individuals who sleepwalk show instability of deep NREM sleep, but the overlap in
findings with persons who do not sleepwalk is great enough to preclude use of this indicator in
establishing a diagnosis. Unlike arousals from REM sleep associated with nightmares, in which
there is an increase in heart rate and respiration prior to the arousal, the NREM sleep arousals of
sleep terrors begin precipitously from sleep, without anticipatory autonomic changes. The
arousals are associated with impressive autonomic activity, with doubling or tripling of the heart
rate. The pathophysiology is poorly understood, but there appears to be instability in the deeper
stages of NREM sleep. Aside from capturing an event during a formal sleep study, there are no
reliable polysomnographic indicators of the tendency to experience sleep terrors.
Functional Consequences of Non–Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Arousal
Disorders
For the diagnosis of an NREM sleep arousal disorder to be made, the individual or household
members must experience clinically significant distress or impairment, although such symptoms
may occur occasionally in nonclinical populations and would be subthreshold for the diagnosis.
