Nightmare disorder.
Breathing-related sleep disorders.
REM sleep behavior disorder.
Parasomnia overlap syndrome.
Sleep-related seizures.
Alcohol-induced blackouts.
Embarrassment concerning the episodes can impair social relationships. Social isolation or
occupational difficulties can result. Uncommonly, NREM sleep arousal disorders may result in
serious injury to the individual or to someone trying to console the individual. Injuries to others
are confined to those in close proximity; individuals are not “sought out.” For individuals with
sleep-related eating behaviors, unknowingly preparing or eating food during the sleep period
may create problems such as poor diabetes control, weight gain, injury (cuts and burns), or
consequences of eating dangerous or toxic inedibles. NREM sleep arousal disorders may rarely
result in violent or injurious behaviors with forensic implications.
Differential Diagnosis
In contrast to individuals with NREM sleep arousal disorders, individuals
with nightmare disorder typically awaken easily and completely, report vivid storylike dreams
accompanying the episodes, and tend to have episodes later in the night. NREM sleep arousal
disorders occur during NREM sleep, whereas nightmares usually occur during REM sleep.
Parents of children with NREM sleep arousal disorders may misinterpret reports of fragmentary
imagery as nightmares.
456
Breathing disorders during sleep can also produce confusional
arousals with subsequent amnesia. However, breathing-related sleep disorders are also
characterized by symptoms of snoring, breathing pauses, and daytime sleepiness. In some
individuals, a breathing-related sleep disorder may precipitate episodes of sleepwalking.
REM sleep behavior disorder may be difficult to distinguish from
NREM sleep arousal disorders. REM sleep behavior disorder is characterized by episodes of
prominent, complex movements, often involving personal injury arising from sleep. In contrast
to NREM sleep arousal disorders, REM sleep behavior disorder occurs during REM sleep.
Individuals with REM sleep behavior disorder may be awakened easily during an episode and
report more detailed and vivid dream content than do individuals with NREM sleep arousal
disorders. These individuals and/or their bed partners often report that they “act out dreams.”
Parasomnia 
overlap 
syndrome 
consists 
of 
clinical 
and
polysomnographic features of both sleepwalking and REM sleep behavior disorder.
Some types of seizures can produce episodes of very unusual behaviors
that occur predominantly or exclusively during sleep. Nocturnal seizures may closely mimic
NREM sleep arousal disorders but tend to be more stereotypic in nature, occur multiple times
nightly, and be more likely to occur from daytime naps. In addition, seizures may arise from
wakefulness, which does not occur with NREM sleep arousal disorders. The presence of sleep-
related seizures does not preclude the presence of NREM sleep arousal disorders. When
recurrent, sleep-related seizures are considered to be a form of epilepsy.
Alcohol-induced blackouts may be associated with extremely complex
behaviors in the absence of other suggestions of intoxication. They do not involve the loss of
consciousness but rather reflect an isolated disruption of memory for events during a drinking
episode. By history, these behaviors may be indistinguishable from those seen in NREM sleep
