Dissociative amnesia, with dissociative fugue.
Malingering or other voluntary behavior.
Panic disorder.
Medication-induced complex behaviors.
Night eating syndrome.
F51.5
arousal disorders.
Dissociative fugue may be extremely difficult to
distinguish from sleepwalking. Unlike all other parasomnias, nocturnal dissociative fugue arises
from a period of wakefulness during sleep, rather than precipitously from sleep without
intervening wakefulness. A history of recurrent childhood physical or sexual abuse is usually
present (but may be difficult to obtain).
As with dissociative fugue, malingering or other voluntary
behavior occurs during wakefulness.
Panic attacks may also cause abrupt awakenings from deep NREM sleep
accompanied by fearfulness, but these episodes produce rapid and complete awakening without
the confusion, amnesia, or motor activity typical of NREM sleep arousal disorders.
Behaviors similar to those in NREM sleep arousal disorders
can be induced by use of, or withdrawal from, substances or medications (e.g., benzodiazepines,
nonbenzodiazepine sedative-hypnotics, opiates, cocaine, nicotine, antipsychotics or other
dopamine receptor–blocking agents, tricyclic antidepressants, chloral hydrate). Such behaviors
may arise from the sleep period and may be extremely complex. The underlying pathophysiology
appears to be a relatively isolated amnesia. In such cases, substance/medication-induced sleep
disorder, parasomnia type, should be diagnosed (see “Substance/Medication-Induced Sleep
Disorder” later in this chapter).
In contrast to the sleep-related eating form of sleepwalking, which is
characterized by recurrent episodes of eating during incomplete arousals from sleep, night eating
syndrome is considered to be an abnormality in the circadian rhythm of meal timing, with a
normal circadian timing of sleep onset in which the individual wakes up in the middle of the
night and overeats.
457
Comorbidity
Typically, sleepwalking in both children and adults is not associated with significant mental
disorders. However, in adults, there is an association between sleepwalking and major depressive
episodes and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Children or adults with sleep terrors may have
elevated scores for depression and anxiety on personality inventories.
Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders
The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition, includes “confusional arousal,
sleep terrors, and sleepwalking” as NREM sleep arousal disorders.
Nightmare Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
