comorbid condition(s) or disorder(s)] followed by the diagnostic code(s) for the comorbid
conditions or disorders (e.g., F51.5 nightmare disorder with moderate alcohol use disorder and
rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder; F10.20 moderate alcohol use disorder; G47.52
REM sleep behavior disorder).
Diagnostic Features
Nightmares are typically lengthy, elaborate, story-like sequences of dream imagery that seem
real and that incite anxiety, fear, or other dysphoric emotions. Nightmare content typically
focuses on attempts to avoid or cope with imminent danger but may involve themes that evoke
other negative emotions. Nightmares occurring after traumatic experiences may replicate the
threatening situation (“replicative nightmares”), but most do not. On awakening, nightmares are
well remembered and can be described in detail. They arise almost exclusively during REM
sleep and can thus occur throughout sleep but are more likely in the second half of the major
sleep episode when dreaming is longer and more intense. Factors that increase early-night REM
intensity, such as sleep fragmentation or deprivation, jet lag, and medications that affect REM
sleep, might facilitate nightmares earlier in the night, including at sleep onset.
Nightmares usually terminate with awakening and rapid return of full alertness. However, the
dysphoric emotions may persist into wakefulness and contribute to difficulty returning to sleep
and lasting daytime distress. Some nightmares, known as “bad dreams,” may not induce
awakening and are recalled only later. If nightmares occur during sleep-onset REM periods
(hypnagogic), the dysphoric emotion is frequently accompanied by an awakening and being
unable to move voluntarily (sleep paralysis), which may also occur in isolation without a
preceding dream or nightmare.
Associated Features
Mild autonomic arousal, including sweating, tachycardia, and tachypnea, may characterize
nightmares. Body movements and vocalizations are not characteristic because of REM sleep–
related loss of skeletal muscle tone. When talking or emoting occurs in nightmare disorder, the
vocal or motor behaviors are typically brief events terminating the nightmare. Distinct from such
motor or vocal activity, true dream enactment behavior may occur when there is a loss of normal
REM atonia (REM sleep behavior disorder).
Prevalence
Prevalence of nightmares during childhood is approximately 1%–5%. From 1.3% to 3.9% of
parents report that their preschool children have nightmares “often” or “always.” Prevalence
increases to 5.2% in children ages 5–15 years. Family history of nightmares, parasomnia
symptoms, and daytime consequences of temper outbursts/mood disturbance and poor academic
performance are associated with frequent nightmares during childhood and adolescence, with
comorbid insomnia seen in approximately 20% of children with frequent nightmares. Among
adults, prevalence of nightmares at least monthly is 6%. Among adults in several countries,
prevalence of weekly nightmares is 2%–6%, whereas prevalence of frequent nightmares is 1%–
5%. Estimates often combine idiopathic and posttraumatic nightmares indiscriminately.
