Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Course modifiers.
Development and Course
Nightmares often begin between ages 3 and 6 years but reach a peak prevalence and severity in
late adolescence or early adulthood. Nightmares most likely appear in children
459
exposed to acute or chronic psychosocial stressors and thus may not resolve spontaneously. In a
minority, frequent nightmares persist into adulthood, becoming virtually a lifelong disturbance.
Although specific nightmare content may reflect the individual’s age, the essential features of the
disorder are the same across age groups.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Frequent nightmares in middle-age adults in the general community population have been shown
in two studies in Hong Kong and Finland to be associated with low income, mood disturbance,
insomnia or sleep-disordered breathing, and use of antidepressants or frequent heavy alcohol use.
Sleep deprivation or fragmentation, and irregular sleep-wake schedules that alter
the timing, intensity, or quantity of REM sleep can put individuals at risk for nightmares.
Individuals who experience nightmares report more frequent past adverse events, but not
necessarily trauma.
Twin studies have identified genetic effects on the disposition to
nightmares and their co-occurrence with other nocturnal behaviors (e.g., sleeptalking).
Adaptive parental bedside behaviors, such as soothing the child following
nightmares, may protect against developing chronic nightmares.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The significance attributed to nightmares may vary by culture, and sensitivity to such beliefs
may facilitate disclosure. In several cultural contexts, nightmares may be viewed as important
indicators of the individual’s spiritual status or the condition of those who have died (e.g., among
Indonesian civil war survivors, American Indian veterans, and Cambodian refugees). Frequent
nightmares among Cambodian refugees are strongly associated with the presence of
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD); assessment of the temporal sequence and severity of
nightmares relative to other symptoms is needed to determine whether a separate diagnosis of
nightmare disorder is warranted. Among Hmong immigrants to the United States, frequent
nightmares are more common than among non-Latinx Whites in the same region and are
associated with traumatic experiences and other sleep disorders, such as sleep paralysis and
restless sleep.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Adult women report having nightmares more frequently than adult men, but this gender
difference was not found in children and the elderly. Nightmare content differs by gender, with
women tending to report themes of sexual harassment or of loved ones disappearing/dying, and
men tending to report themes of physical aggression or war/terror.
