Sleep terror disorder.
REM sleep behavior disorder.
Bereavement.
Diagnostic Markers
Polysomnographic studies demonstrate abrupt awakenings from REM sleep, usually during the
second half of the night, prior to report of a nightmare. Heart, respiratory, and eye movement
rates may quicken or increase in variability before awakening. Nightmares following traumatic
events may also arise during light non-REM (NREM) sleep, particularly stage 2 sleep (now
called N2 sleep). The typical sleep of individuals with nightmares is mildly impaired (e.g.,
reduced efficiency, less slow-wave sleep, more awakenings), with more frequent periodic leg
movements in sleep and relative sympathetic nervous system activation after REM sleep
deprivation.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Individuals with frequent nightmares are at substantially greater risk for suicidal thoughts or
behavior, even when gender and mental illness are taken into account.
460
Functional Consequences of Nightmare Disorder
Nightmares cause more significant subjective distress than demonstrable social or occupational
impairment. However, if awakenings are frequent or result in sleep avoidance, individuals may
experience excessive daytime sleepiness, poor concentration, depression, anxiety, or irritability.
Frequent childhood nightmares (e.g., several per week) may cause significant distress to parents
and children.
Differential Diagnosis
Both nightmare disorder and sleep terror disorder include awakenings or
partial awakenings with fearfulness and autonomic activation, but the two disorders can be
readily differentiated. Nightmares typically occur later in the night, during REM sleep, and
produce vivid, story-like, and clearly recalled dreams; mild autonomic arousal; and complete
awakenings. Sleep terrors typically arise in the first third of the night during deep NREM sleep
(especially during stage 3 sleep, now called N3 sleep) and produce either no dream recall or
images without an elaborate story-like quality. Sleep terrors are thought to be caused by partial
awakenings intermixed with persisting sleep, with clinical manifestations of confusion,
disorientation, and only partial responsiveness, and often with substantial autonomic arousal.
There is usually amnesia for the event in the morning.
The presence of complex vocal and motor activity during frightening
dreams should prompt further evaluation for REM sleep behavior disorder, which occurs more
typically among late middle- and older-age men but may also affect women. Although
nightmares are typically characteristic of REM sleep behavior disorder, unlike nightmare
disorder, REM sleep behavior disorder is associated with dream enactment that may cause
nocturnal injuries. If the nightmares precede REM sleep behavior disorder and warrant
independent clinical attention, an additional diagnosis of nightmare disorder may be given.
Dysphoric dreams may occur during bereavement but typically involve loss and
sadness and are followed by self-reflection and insight, rather than distress, on awakening.
