PTSD or acute stress disorder.
Narcolepsy.
Sleep-related seizures.
Breathing-related sleep disorders.
Panic disorder.
Sleep-related dissociative disorders.
Substance or medication use.
Nightmares in which the content or affect of the dream is related to
a traumatic event may be a component of PTSD or acute stress disorder. An additional diagnosis
of nightmare disorder may be warranted if the severity or frequency of the nightmares
necessitates independent clinical attention.
Nightmares are a frequent complaint in narcolepsy, but the presence of excessive
sleepiness, with or without cataplexy, differentiates this condition from nightmare disorder.
Nocturnal seizures usually involve stereotyped motor activity. Associated
nightmares, if recalled, are often also repetitively stereotyped in nature or reflect epileptogenic
features such as the content of diurnal auras, phosphenes (visual sensations in the absence of
light input), or ictal imagery.
Breathing-related sleep disorders can lead to awakenings with
autonomic arousal, but these are not usually accompanied by recall of nightmares.
Panic attacks arising during sleep can produce abrupt awakenings with autonomic
arousal and fearfulness, but nightmares are typically not reported and symptoms are similar to
panic attacks arising during wakefulness.
Individuals may recall actual physical or emotional trauma as
a “dream” during electroencephalography-documented awakenings.
Numerous substances/medications can precipitate nightmares,
including dopaminergic drugs; β-adrenergic antagonists and other antihypertensives;
amphetamine-type substances, cocaine, and other stimulants; antidepressants; smoking cessation
aids; and melatonin. Withdrawal of REM sleep–suppressant medications
461
(e.g., antidepressants) and alcohol can produce REM sleep rebound accompanied by nightmares.
If nightmares are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention, a diagnosis of
substance/medication-induced sleep disorder should be considered.
Comorbidity
Nightmares may be comorbid with several medical conditions, including coronary heart disease,
cancer, parkinsonism, and pain, and can accompany medical treatments, such as hemodialysis, or
withdrawal from medications or substances of abuse. Nightmares frequently co-occur with other
mental disorders, including PTSD, acute stress disorder, insomnia disorder, REM sleep behavior
disorder, and psychotic, mood, anxiety, adjustment, and personality disorders, as well as with
grief during bereavement. A concurrent nightmare disorder diagnosis should only be considered
when independent clinical attention is warranted. These conditions should be listed with the
appropriate comorbid category specifier (e.g., “with REM sleep behavior disorder”); see also
“Recording Procedures.”
Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders
The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition, presents similar diagnostic
criteria for nightmare disorder.
