G47.52
Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Behavior Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Repeated episodes of arousal during sleep associated with vocalization and/or
complex motor behaviors.
B. These behaviors arise during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and therefore
usually occur more than 90 minutes after sleep onset, are more frequent during
the later portions of the sleep period, and uncommonly occur during daytime
naps.
C. Upon awakening from these episodes, the individual is completely awake, alert,
and not confused or disoriented.
D. Either of the following:
1. REM sleep without atonia on polysomnographic recording.
2. A history suggestive of REM sleep behavior disorder and an established
synucleinopathy diagnosis (e.g., Parkinson’s disease, multiple system
atrophy).
E. The behaviors cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning (which may include injury to
self or the bed partner).
F. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
G. Coexisting mental disorders and medical conditions do not explain the episodes.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder is repeated episodes
of vocalizations and/or complex motor behaviors arising from REM sleep (Criterion A). These
behaviors often reflect motor responses to the content of action-filled or violent dreams of being
attacked or trying to escape from a threatening situation, which may be termed dream enacting
behaviors. The vocalizations are often loud, emotion-filled, and profane. These behaviors may be
very bothersome to the individual and the bed partner and
462
may result in significant injury (e.g., falling, jumping, or flying out of bed; running, punching,
thrusting, hitting, or kicking). However, individuals with REM sleep behavior disorder may also
present with relatively subtle vocal or motor behaviors during REM sleep, which are typically
not the primary presenting sleep complaint but manifest during history taking or
polysomnography in sleep, neurological, and psychiatric clinical visits. Upon awakening, the
individual is usually immediately awake, alert, and oriented (Criterion C) and is often able to
recall dream mentation, which closely correlates with the observed behavior. The eyes typically
