remain closed during these events. The presence of REM sleep without atonia during a
polysomnogram is typically required for the diagnosis of REM sleep behavior disorder.
Alternatively, if polysomnography has not been performed, a provisional diagnosis of probable
REM sleep behavior disorder may be given if there is an established synucleinopathy diagnosis
(e.g., Parkinson's disease, multiple system atrophy) and the history is suggestive of REM sleep
behavior disorder (Criterion D). The diagnosis of REM sleep behavior disorder requires
clinically significant distress or impairment (Criterion E); this determination will depend on a
number of factors, including the frequency of events, the potential for violence or injurious
behaviors, embarrassment, and distress in other household members.
Severity determination is best made based on the nature or consequence of the behavior
rather than simply on frequency. Although the behaviors are typically prominent and violent,
lesser behaviors may also occur.
Prevalence
The prevalence of REM sleep behavior disorder was approximately 1% in a middle- to older-age
general population sample in Switzerland and approximately 2% in an elderly general population
sample in South Korea. One prevalence study found an equal prevalence between men and
women in individuals younger than 50 years, while another study reported a prevalence of just
over 1% with no difference between men and women in a population with a mean age of 59
years. Prevalence in individuals with psychiatric disorders may be greater, possibly related to
medications prescribed for the psychiatric disorder.
Development and Course
The onset of REM sleep behavior disorder may be gradual or rapid. Because of the very high
association with the later appearance of an underlying neurodegenerative disorder, the
neurological status of individuals with REM sleep behavior disorder should be closely
monitored. In individuals with idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder, the risk of developing a
defined neurodegenerative disease, most often a synucleinopathy (i.e., Parkinson’s disease,
major or mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies, or multiple system atrophy), is
approximately 75% within 10–15 years following diagnosis, with an annualized risk of
approximately 6%–7% per year.
Symptoms in young individuals, particularly young women, should raise the possibility of
narcolepsy; substance/medication-induced sleep disorder, parasomnia type; a brainstem lesion;
or an autoimmune encephalopathy.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Chinese individuals diagnosed with REM sleep behavior disorder by a neurology service in
Taiwan had similar clinical and laboratory characteristics as non-Latinx White individuals in the
United States; however, they differed in having a higher rate of nocturnal wandering out of the
bedroom and a lower rate of sleep-related injuries, possibly as a result of earlier detection by the
family.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
