Other parasomnias.
REM sleep behavior disorder is more common in men older than 50 years, but increasingly this
disorder is being identified in women and in younger individuals. Women are younger than men
in age at onset and age at diagnosis.
463
Diagnostic Markers
Associated laboratory findings from polysomnography indicate increased tonic and/or phasic
electromyographic activity during REM sleep, which is normally associated with muscle atonia.
The increased muscle activity variably affects different muscle groups; more extensive
electromyographic monitoring with arm electromyography (e.g., biceps brachii) should be
considered because this measure is more specific for a REM sleep behavior disorder diagnosis. It
is suggested that electromyographic monitoring also include the submentalis, bilateral flexor
digitorum superficialis, and bilateral anterior tibialis muscle groups. Continuous video
monitoring should accompany the polysomnography. Other polysomnographic findings may
include very frequent periodic and aperiodic extremity electromyography activity during non-
REM (NREM) sleep. REM sleep without atonia is present in virtually all cases of REM sleep
behavior disorder but may also be an asymptomatic polysomnographic finding. It is not known
whether isolated REM sleep without atonia is a precursor to REM sleep behavior disorder,
although a pilot study suggested that isolated REM sleep without atonia may also be associated
with neurodegenerative markers (i.e., hyposmia, orthostatic hypotension, color vision loss) and
that 7%–14% of individuals with isolated REM sleep without atonia later develop clinical REM
sleep behavior disorder. Thresholds for normative REM sleep without atonia levels have also
been published that may serve to distinguish borderline cases and those whose neurological
status should be further monitored.
Functional Consequences of Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Behavior
Disorder
The most serious consequences of REM sleep behavior disorder are the short-term risks for
injury to the individual or bed partner related to attacks of dream enactment, and the long-term
risk of developing a defined neurodegenerative disease. According to surveys of individuals and
their bed partners, approximately 55% of individuals with REM sleep behavior disorder may
experience injury as a consequence of their attacks, with 12% of injuries being serious (including
long bone or rib fractures or subdural hematomas) and requiring medical attention.
Differential Diagnosis
Confusional arousals, sleepwalking, and sleep terrors can easily be confused
with REM sleep behavior disorder. In general, these disorders occur in individuals younger than
50 years. Unlike REM sleep behavior disorder, they arise from NREM sleep and therefore tend
to occur in the early portion of the sleep period. Awakening from a confusional arousal is
associated with confusion, disorientation, and incomplete recall of dream mentation
accompanying the behavior. Polysomnographic monitoring in the disorders of arousal generally
reveals normal REM sleep atonia unless there is a comorbid parasomnia.
