Medication-induced sleep disorder, parasomnia type.
Asymptomatic REM sleep without atonia.
Nocturnal seizures.
Obstructive sleep apnea.
Other specified dissociative disorder (sleep-related psychogenic dissociative disorder).
Malingering.
Many widely prescribed medications, including
tricyclic antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and serotonin-norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitors, may result in polysomnographic evidence of REM sleep without atonia and
in frank REM sleep behavior disorder, which is diagnosed as a medication-induced sleep
disorder, parasomnia type. It is not known whether the medications per se result in REM sleep
without atonia and/or REM sleep behavior disorder, or whether they unmask an underlying
predisposition.
Clinical dream-enacting behaviors coupled with the
polysomnographic finding of REM sleep without atonia is necessary for the diagnosis of REM
sleep behavior disorder. REM sleep without atonia without a clinical history of dream-enacting
behaviors is simply an asymptomatic polysomnographic observation with an as yet unknown
clinical significance.
464
Nocturnal seizures may mimic REM sleep behavior disorder, but the
behaviors characteristic of nocturnal seizures are generally stereotyped. Polysomnographic
monitoring employing a full electroencephalographic seizure montage may differentiate the two.
REM sleep without atonia is generally not present on polysomnographic monitoring in
individuals with epilepsy.
Obstructive sleep apnea may result in vocalizations and motor behaviors
that very closely resemble REM sleep behavior disorder, such as talking, shouting, gesturing,
and punching, along with unpleasant dreams. Polysomnographic monitoring is necessary to
differentiate between these two disorders. In REM sleep behavior disorder, the parasomnia
symptoms occur during periods of REM sleep without atonia. In obstructive sleep apnea, the
parasomnia symptoms only occur during arousals at the end of the obstructive sleep apneic
events and resolve following effective treatment of the obstructive sleep apnea (continuous
positive airway pressure). REM sleep without atonia is not typically observed in obstructive
sleep apnea.
Unlike virtually
all other parasomnias, which arise precipitously from NREM or REM sleep, psychogenic
dissociative behaviors arise from a period of well-defined wakefulness during the sleep period.
Unlike REM sleep behavior disorder, this condition is more prevalent in young women.
Many cases of malingering in which the individual reports problematic sleep
movements mimic the clinical features of REM sleep behavior disorder, and polysomnographic
documentation is mandatory.
Comorbidity
REM sleep behavior disorder is present concurrently in approximately 30% of patients with
narcolepsy. When it occurs in narcolepsy, the demographics reflect the younger age range of
narcolepsy, with equal frequency in men and women. Based on findings from individuals
presenting to sleep clinics, most individuals (>70%) with initially “idiopathic” REM sleep
behavior disorder will eventually develop a neurodegenerative disease—most notably, one of the
