of the legs occur in an effort to relieve the uncomfortable sensations. Although symptoms can
occur during the daytime, they commonly occur in the late afternoon or evening hours, and in
some individuals, symptoms occur only in the evening or night. Symptoms are often most severe
at night when the individual is at rest, such as sitting or lying in bed. Evening worsening occurs
independently of any differences in activity. The diagnosis of RLS is based primarily on
individual self-report and history. It is important to differentiate RLS from other conditions that
cause leg discomfort, such as positional discomfort and leg cramps (Criterion D).
The symptoms of RLS can delay sleep onset and awaken the individual from sleep and are
associated with significant sleep fragmentation. The relief obtained from moving the legs may no
longer be apparent in severe cases. RLS is associated with daytime sleepiness and is frequently
accompanied by significant clinical distress or functional impairment.
Associated Features
Periodic leg movements in sleep (PLMS) can serve as corroborating evidence for RLS, with up
to 90% of individuals diagnosed with RLS demonstrating PLMS when recordings are taken over
multiple nights. Periodic leg movements during wakefulness are also supportive of an RLS
diagnosis. Reports of difficulty initiating and maintaining sleep and of excessive daytime
sleepiness substantiate a diagnosis of RLS. Additional supportive features include a family
history of RLS among first-degree relatives and a reduction in symptoms, at least initially, with
dopaminergic treatment.
Prevalence
Prevalence rates of RLS vary widely when broad criteria are utilized. When frequency of
symptoms is at least three times per week with moderate or severe distress, the prevalence rate in
the United States and Europe has been estimated as 1.6%. RLS that is severe enough to
significantly impair functioning or is associated with mental disorders, including depression and
anxiety, occurs in approximately 2%–3% of the population, as assessed in Western Europe, the
United States, and South Korea. RLS is about twice as common in women as men and increases
in prevalence with age. Reports of RLS vary across geographic regions, with lower prevalence in
several Asian populations (e.g., Japan, South Korea).
466
Development and Course
The onset of RLS typically occurs in the second or third decade. Approximately 40% of
individuals diagnosed with RLS during adulthood report having experienced symptoms before
age 20 years, and 20% report having experienced symptoms before age 10 years. Prevalence
rates of RLS increase steadily with age until about age 60 years, with symptoms remaining stable
or decreasing slightly in older age groups. Compared with nonfamilial cases, familial RLS
usually has a younger age at onset and a slower progressive course. The clinical course of RLS
differs by age at onset. When onset occurs before age 45, there is often a slow progression of
symptoms. In late-onset RLS, rapid progression is typical, and aggravating factors are common.
The RLS phenotype appears similar across the life span.
Diagnosis of RLS in children can be difficult because of the centrality of self-report in
