Genetic and physiological.
establishing the diagnosis. While Criterion A for adults assumes that the description of “urge to
move” is by the individual, pediatric diagnosis also requires a description in the child’s own
words rather than by a parent or caretaker. Typically children age 6 years or older are able to
provide detailed, adequate descriptors of RLS. However, children rarely use or understand the
word “urge,” reporting instead that their legs “have to” or “got to” move. Also, potentially
related to prolonged periods of sitting during class, two-thirds of children and adolescents with
RLS report daytime leg sensations. Thus, for diagnostic Criterion A3, it is important to compare
equal duration of sitting or lying down in the day to sitting or lying down in the evening or night.
Nocturnal worsening tends to persist even in pediatric RLS. As with RLS in adults, there is a
significant negative impact on sleep, mood, cognition, and function. Impairment in children and
adolescents is manifested more often in behavioral and educational domains.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Predisposing factors include female sex, advancing age, genetic risk
variants, and family history of RLS. Precipitating factors such as iron deficiency are often time-
limited, with most individuals resuming normal sleep patterns after the triggering event has
disappeared. Genetic risk variants also play a role in RLS secondary to disorders such as uremia,
suggesting that individuals with a genetic susceptibility develop RLS in the presence of
additional risk factors.
Genome-wide association studies have found that RLS is significantly associated with
multiple genetic variants in intronic or intergenic regions. The variant in MEIS1 has the strongest
association with RLS of these genes, with nearly double the risk of RLS in the 7% of the
population with this polymorphism among European-ancestry samples studied.
Pathophysiological mechanisms in RLS also include disturbances in the central dopaminergic
and opioidergic systems and disturbances in iron metabolism. Treatment efficacy of
dopaminergic drugs, opioids, and iron provides further support that these systems play a role in
the pathophysiology of RLS. RLS may predispose to depression, and the effective treatment of
RLS may significantly reduce depressive symptoms. However, serotonergic antidepressants can
induce or aggravate RLS in some individuals.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Among indigenous-descent Latin American adult populations in the United States, including
Mexican Americans with low acculturation to U.S. society, the reported prevalence of RLS
appears to be lower when compared with Mexican Americans with higher acculturation. Among
participants who reported RLS in a large population-based survey, risk factors associated with
RLS were different in Mexican Americans (higher among women and persons who smoke)
compared with non-Latinx Whites (older age, defined as ≥ 48 years).
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Although RLS is more prevalent in women than in men, there are no diagnostic differences
according to gender. The prevalence of RLS during pregnancy is two to three times greater
467
