than in the general population. RLS associated with pregnancy peaks during the third trimester
and improves or resolves in most cases soon after delivery. The sex difference in prevalence of
RLS is explained at least in part by parity, with nulliparous females being at the same risk for
RLS as age-matched males.
Diagnostic Markers
Polysomnography demonstrates significant abnormalities in RLS, including increased latency to
sleep and higher arousal index. Periodic limb movements are the motor sign of RLS and are
usually present on overnight polysomnography, as well as during waking immobilization tests
and during quiet resting, both of which can provoke RLS symptoms.
Functional Consequences of Restless Legs Syndrome
Although the impact of milder symptoms is less well characterized, individuals with RLS
complain of disruption in at least one activity of daily living, with up to 50% reporting a negative
impact on mood and a lack of energy. A common consequence of RLS is sleep disturbance,
including difficulty falling asleep and sleep fragmentation, with associated reduction in total
sleep time. RLS is also associated with quality-of-life impairments. RLS can result in daytime
sleepiness or fatigue and is frequently accompanied by significant distress or impairment in
affective, social, occupational, educational, academic, behavioral, or cognitive functioning.
Differential Diagnosis
The most important conditions in the differential diagnosis of RLS are leg cramps, positional
discomfort, arthralgias/arthritis, myalgias, positional ischemia (numbness), leg edema, peripheral
neuropathy, radiculopathy, and habitual foot tapping. Muscle cramps, relief with a single
postural shift, limitation to joints, soreness to palpation (myalgias), and other abnormalities on
physical examination are not characteristic of RLS. Unlike RLS, nocturnal leg cramps do not
typically manifest with the desire to move the limbs nor are there frequent limb movements. Less
common conditions to be differentiated from RLS include neuroleptic-induced akathisia,
myelopathy, symptomatic venous insufficiency, peripheral artery disease, eczema, other
orthopedic problems, and anxiety-induced restlessness. Worsening at night and periodic limb
movements are more common in RLS than in medication-induced akathisia or peripheral
neuropathy.
While it is important that RLS symptoms not be solely accounted for by another medical or
behavioral condition, it should also be appreciated that any of these similar conditions can occur
in an individual with RLS. This necessitates a separate focus on each possible condition in the
diagnostic process and when assessing impact. For cases in which the diagnosis of RLS is not
certain, evaluation for the supportive features of RLS, particularly PLMS or a family history of
RLS, may be helpful. Clinical features, such as response to a dopaminergic agent and positive
family history for RLS, can help with the differential diagnosis.
Comorbidity
RLS is associated with higher rates of depression, generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder,
and posttraumatic stress disorder. The main medical condition comorbid with RLS is
