cardiovascular disease. There may be an association with numerous other medical conditions,
including hypertension, migraine, Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis, peripheral neuropathy,
diabetes mellitus, fibromyalgia, osteoporosis, obesity, thyroid disease, and cancer, as well as
other sleep disorders including narcolepsy and obstructive sleep apnea. RLS is common in those
with iron deficiency, pregnancy, and chronic renal failure and can dramatically improve once
these conditions resolve.
468
Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders
The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition, presents similar diagnostic
criteria for RLS but does not contain a criterion specifying frequency or duration of symptoms.
Substance/Medication-Induced Sleep Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A prominent and severe disturbance in sleep.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
of both (1) and (2):
1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance
intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a
medication.
2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in
Criterion A.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by a sleep disorder that is not
substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent sleep disorder
could include the following:
The symptoms precede the onset of the substance/medication use; the
symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after
the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other
evidence 
suggesting 
the 
existence 
of 
an 
independent 
non-
substance/medication-induced sleep disorder (e.g., a history of recurrent non-
substance/medication-related episodes).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance
intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A
predominate in the clinical picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant
clinical attention.
