excessive sleepiness/fatigue during waking hours or, less commonly, a long
sleep period.
Parasomnia type: Characterized by abnormal behavioral events during sleep.
Mixed type: Characterized by a substance/medication-induced sleep problem
characterized by multiple types of sleep symptoms, but no symptom clearly
predominates.
Specify (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders,”
which indicates whether “with onset during intoxication” and/or “with onset during
withdrawal” applies to a given substance class; or specify “with onset after
medication use”):
With onset during intoxication: If criteria are met for intoxication with the
substance and the symptoms develop during the intoxication.
With onset during withdrawal: If criteria are met for withdrawal from the
substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
With onset after medication use: If symptoms developed at initiation of
medication, with a change in use of medication, or during withdrawal of
medication.
Recording Procedures
The name of the substance/medication-induced sleep disorder begins with the specific substance
(e.g., alcohol) that is presumed to be causing the sleep disturbance. The ICD-10-CM code that
corresponds to the applicable drug class is selected from the table included in the criteria set. For
substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., fluoxetine), the ICD-10-CM code for the
other (or unknown) substance class should be used and the name
470
of the specific substance recorded (e.g., F19.982 fluoxetine-induced sleep disorder, insomnia
type). In cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific
substance is unknown, the ICD-10-CM code for the other (or unknown) substance class is used
and the fact that the substance is unknown is recorded (e.g., F19.982 unknown substance-
induced sleep disorder, hypersomnia type).
To record the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is listed
first, followed by “with substance/medication-induced sleep disorder” (incorporating the name of
the specific etiological substance/medication), followed by the specification of onset (i.e., with
onset during intoxication, with onset during withdrawal, with onset after medication use),
followed by the subtype designation (i.e., insomnia type, daytime sleepiness type, parasomnia
type, mixed type). For example, in the case of insomnia occurring during withdrawal in a man
with a severe lorazepam use disorder, the diagnosis is F13.282 severe lorazepam use disorder
with lorazepam-induced sleep disorder, with onset during withdrawal, insomnia type. A separate
diagnosis of the comorbid severe lorazepam use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced
sleep disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., with medication use as
