prescribed), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F19.982 bupropion-induced
sleep disorder, with onset during medication use, insomnia type). When more than one substance
is judged to play a significant role in the development of the sleep disturbance, each should be
listed separately (e.g., F10.282 severe alcohol use disorder with alcohol-induced sleep disorder,
with onset during intoxication, insomnia type; F14.282 severe cocaine use disorder with cocaine-
induced sleep disorder, with onset during intoxication, insomnia type).
Specifiers
Depending on the substance involved, one of four types of sleep disturbances is indicated.
Insomnia type and daytime sleepiness type are most common, whereas parasomnia type is seen
less often. The mixed type is noted when more than one type of sleep disturbance–related
symptom is present and none predominates.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of substance/medication-induced sleep disorder is a prominent sleep
disturbance that is sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention (Criterion A). The
sleep disturbance may be characterized by insomnia, daytime sleepiness, a parasomnia, or some
combination of these. The sleep disturbance is judged to be primarily associated with the
pharmacological effects of a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse, a medication, toxin exposure)
(Criterion B). The disturbance must not be better explained by another sleep disorder that is not
substance/medication-induced (Criterion C). A substance/medication-induced sleep disorder is
distinguished from insomnia disorder or a disorder associated with excessive daytime sleepiness
by considering onset and course. For drugs of abuse, there must be evidence of intoxication or
withdrawal 
from 
the 
history, 
physical 
examination, 
or 
laboratory 
findings.
Substance/medication-induced sleep disorder arises only in association with intoxication or
discontinuation/withdrawal states, whereas other sleep disorders may precede the onset of
substance use or occur during times of sustained abstinence. As discontinuation/withdrawal
states for some substances can be protracted, onset of the sleep disturbance can occur 4 weeks
after cessation of substance use, and the disturbance may have features atypical of other sleep
disorders (e.g., atypical age at onset or course). The diagnosis is not made if the sleep
disturbance occurs only during a delirium (Criterion D). The symptoms must cause clinically
significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning
(Criterion E). This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or
substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A predominate in the clinical picture
and when the symptoms warrant independent clinical attention.
471
Associated Features
During periods of substance/medication use, intoxication, or withdrawal, individuals frequently
complain of dysphoric mood, including depression and anxiety, irritability, cognitive
impairment, inability to concentrate, and fatigue.
Prominent and severe sleep disturbances can occur in association with intoxication with the
following classes of substances: alcohol; caffeine; cannabis; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or
