Alcohol.
Caffeine.
Cannabis.
Opioids.
anxiolytics; stimulants (including cocaine); and other (or unknown) substances. Prominent and
severe sleep disturbances can occur in association with withdrawal from the following classes of
substances: alcohol; caffeine; cannabis; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics; stimulants
(including cocaine); tobacco; and other (or unknown) substances. Medications that invoke sleep
disturbances include adrenergic agonists and antagonists, dopamine agonists and antagonists,
cholinergic agonists and antagonists, serotonergic agonists and antagonists, antihistamines, and
corticosteroids.
Alcohol-induced sleep disorder typically occurs as insomnia type. During acute
intoxication with doses > 1 g/kg, alcohol produces an immediate sedative effect depending on
dose, accompanied by a reduction in sleep latency, increased non–rapid eye movement (NREM)
sleep stages 2 and 3 (N2 and N3), and reduced rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. Following
these initial effects, there may be increased wakefulness, restless sleep, and vivid and anxiety-
laden dreams for the remaining sleep period. In parallel, N2 and N3 are reduced, and
wakefulness and REM sleep are increased during the latter portion of the night. With habitual
use, alcohol continues to show a short-lived sedative effect in the first half of the night, followed
by sleep continuity disruption in the second half. During acute alcohol withdrawal, there is
extremely disrupted sleep continuity, and an increased amount and intensity of REM sleep,
associated frequently with vivid dreaming, which in extreme form constitutes part of alcohol
withdrawal delirium. After acute withdrawal, chronic alcohol users may continue to complain of
light, fragmented sleep for months to years associated with a persistent prolongation of sleep
latency and deficit in slow-wave sleep. Alcohol also aggravates breathing-related sleep disorder,
including obstructive sleep apnea and sleep-related hypoventilation.
Caffeine consumed in low to moderate doses during the morning hours typically
produces no significant effect on nighttime sleep in normal sleepers or those with insomnia.
Caffeine may produce insomnia in a dose- and timing–dependent manner, particularly when
larger doses are consumed later in the day or during evening hours. Prolongation of sleep
latency, reduction of slow-wave sleep, increased nocturnal awakening, and reduced sleep
duration are reported. Some individuals, particularly high consumers, may present with daytime
sleepiness and performance impairments related to withdrawal.
Acute administration of cannabis may shorten sleep latency, though arousing effects
with increments in sleep latency also occur. Cannabis enhances slow-wave sleep and suppresses
REM sleep after acute administration. In chronic users, tolerance to the sleep-inducing and slow-
wave sleep–enhancing effects develops. Upon withdrawal, sleep difficulties and unpleasant
dreams have been reported lasting for several weeks. Polysomnographic studies demonstrate
reduced slow-wave sleep and increased REM sleep during this phase.
Opioids may produce an increase in sleepiness and in subjective depth of sleep, and
reduced REM and slow-wave sleep, during acute short-term use. With continued administration,
tolerance to the sedative effects of opioids develops and there are complaints of insomnia.
Polysomnographic studies demonstrate reduced sleep efficiency and total sleep time, with
reduction of slow-wave sleep and possibly REM sleep. Consistent with their respiratory
depressant effects, opioids exacerbate obstructive sleep apnea. Emergence of central sleep apnea
is also observed, especially with chronic use of longer-acting opioids.
472
