Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic substances.
Amphetamine-type substances, other stimulants, and MDMA.
Tobacco.
Other or unknown substances/medications.
Sedatives, 
hypnotics, 
and 
anxiolytics 
(e.g.,
barbiturates, benzodiazepine receptor agonists, meprobamate, glutethimide, methyprylon) have
similar effects as opioids on sleep. During acute intoxication, sedative-hypnotic drugs produce
the expected increase in sleepiness and decrease in wakefulness. Daytime sleepiness may occur,
primarily with longer-acting agents. Chronic benzodiazepine use may be associated with
development of tolerance, rebound insomnia, and potentially serious withdrawal effects. Newer
benzodiazepine receptor agonists such as zolpidem and eszopiclone have been shown to maintain
efficacy over periods of 6 months to 2 years, without evidence of dosage escalation or major
withdrawal effects. Newer hypnotic agents such as ramelteon, low-dose doxepin, and suvorexant
do not appear to have significant abuse potential, respiratory depression, or major withdrawal
syndromes. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic drugs with short durations of action are most likely
to produce complaints of rebound insomnia. Some sedative-hypnotic drugs may increase the
frequency and severity of obstructive sleep apnea events, although neither benzodiazepines nor
benzodiazepine receptor agonists have been found to definitively worsen obstructive sleep apnea.
Hypoventilation may worsen in susceptible individuals. Parasomnias (sleepwalking and sleep-
related eating) have been associated with use of benzodiazepine receptor agonists, especially
when these medications are taken at higher doses and when they are combined with other
sedative drugs.
Sleep 
disorders 
induced 
by
amphetamine-type substances and other stimulants are characterized by insomnia during
intoxication and excessive sleepiness during withdrawal. During acute intoxication, stimulants
reduce the total amount of sleep, increase sleep latency and sleep continuity disturbances, and
decrease REM sleep. Slow-wave sleep tends to be reduced. During withdrawal from chronic
stimulant use, there is both prolonged nocturnal sleep duration and excessive daytime sleepiness.
Multiple sleep latency tests may show increased daytime sleepiness during the withdrawal phase.
Drugs like 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA; “ecstasy”) and related substances
lead to restless and disturbed sleep within 48 hours of intake; frequent use of these compounds is
associated with persisting symptoms of anxiety, depression, and sleep disturbances, even during
longer-term abstinence. There is also evidence that suggests an increased frequency of
obstructive sleep apnea in young MDMA users, even after a period of abstention from the drug.
Chronic tobacco use is associated primarily with symptoms of insomnia, decreased
slow-wave sleep with a reduction of sleep efficiency, and increased daytime sleepiness.
Withdrawal from tobacco can lead to impaired sleep. Individuals who smoke heavily may
experience regular nocturnal awakenings caused by tobacco craving.
Other substances/medications may produce sleep
disturbances, particularly medications that affect the central or autonomic nervous systems (e.g.,
adrenergic agonists and antagonists, dopamine agonists and antagonists, cholinergic agonists and
antagonists, serotonergic agonists and antagonists, antihistamines, corticosteroids).
Development and Course
Insomnia in children can be identified by either a parent or the child. Often the child has a clear
sleep disturbance associated with initiation of a medication but may not report symptoms,
although parents observe the sleep disturbances. The use of some recreational substances (e.g.,
