Temperamental.
cannabis, ecstasy) is prevalent in adolescence and early adulthood. Insomnia or any other sleep
disturbance encountered in this age group should prompt careful consideration of whether the
sleep disturbance is attributable to consumption of these substances. Help-seeking behavior for
the sleep disturbance in these age groups is limited, and
473
thus corroborative report may be elicited from a parent, caregiver, or teacher. Older individuals
take more medications and are at increased risk for developing a substance/medication-induced
sleep disorder. They may interpret sleep disturbance as part of normal aging and fail to report
symptoms. Individuals with major neurocognitive disorder (e.g., dementia) are at risk for
substance/medication-induced sleep disorders but may not report symptoms, making
corroborative report from caregiver(s) particularly important.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Risk and prognostic factors involved in substance or medication use are normative for certain
age groups. They are relevant for, and likely applicable to, the type of sleep disturbance
encountered (see the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders” for descriptions of
respective substance use disorders).
Substance use generally precipitates or accompanies insomnia in vulnerable
individuals. Thus, presence of insomnia in response to stress or change in sleep environment or
timing can represent a risk for developing substance/medication-induced sleep disorder. A
similar risk may be present for individuals with other sleep disorders (e.g., individuals with
hypersomnia who use stimulants).
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
The same amount and duration of consumption of a given substance may lead to highly different
sleep-related outcomes in males and females based on, for example, sex-specific differences in
hepatic functioning.
Diagnostic Markers
Each of the substance/medication-induced sleep disorders produces electroencephalographic
sleep patterns that are associated with, but cannot be considered diagnostic of, other disorders.
The electroencephalographic sleep profile for each substance is related to the stage of use and
whether it is in the context of intake/intoxication, chronic use, or withdrawal following
discontinuation of the substance. All-night polysomnography can help define the severity of
insomnia complaints, while the multiple sleep latency test provides information about the
severity of daytime sleepiness. Monitoring of nocturnal respiration and periodic limb movements
with polysomnography may verify a substance’s impact on nocturnal breathing and motor
behavior. Sleep diaries for 2 weeks and actigraphy are considered helpful in confirming the
presence of substance/medication-induced sleep disorder, especially in the case of suspected
insomnia type. Drug screening can be of use when the individual is not aware or unwilling to
relate information about substance intake.
