Substance intoxication and substance withdrawal.
Delirium.
Other sleep disorders.
Sleep disorder associated with medical condition.
Functional Consequences of Substance/Medication-Induced Sleep
Disorder
While there are many functional consequences associated with sleep disorders, the only unique
consequence for substance/medication-induced sleep disorder is increased risk for relapse. For
example, the degree of sleep disturbance during alcohol withdrawal (e.g., REM sleep rebound)
predicts risk of relapse of drinking. Monitoring of sleep quality and daytime sleepiness during
and after withdrawal may provide clinically meaningful information on whether an individual is
at increased risk for relapse.
Differential Diagnosis
Sleep disturbances are commonly encountered in
the context of substance intoxication and substance withdrawal. A diagnosis of
substance/medication-induced sleep disorder should be made instead of a
474
diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the sleep disturbance is
predominant in the clinical picture and is sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical
attention.
If the substance/medication-induced sleep disturbance occurs exclusively during the
course of a delirium, it is not diagnosed separately.
A substance/medication-induced sleep disorder is distinguished from
another sleep disorder if a substance/medication is judged to be etiologically related to the
symptoms. A substance/medication-induced sleep disorder attributed to a prescribed medication
for a mental disorder or medical condition must have its onset while the individual is receiving
the medication or during discontinuation, if there is a discontinuation/withdrawal syndrome
associated with the medication. Once treatment is discontinued, the sleep disturbance will
usually remit within days to several weeks. If symptoms persist beyond 4 weeks, other causes for
the sleep disturbance–related symptoms should be considered. Not infrequently, individuals with
another sleep disorder use medications or drugs of abuse to self-medicate their symptoms (e.g.,
alcohol for management of insomnia). If the substance/medication is judged to play a significant
role in the exacerbation of the sleep disturbance, an additional diagnosis of a
substance/medication-induced sleep disorder may be warranted.
Substance/medication-induced sleep disorder and
sleep disorders with a medical condition (i.e., insomnia disorder, hypersomnolence disorder, and
nightmare disorder) may produce similar symptoms of insomnia, daytime sleepiness, or
nightmares, respectively. Many medical conditions that cause sleep disturbance are treated with
medications that may also cause sleep disturbances. The chronology of symptoms is the most
important factor in distinguishing between these two sources of sleep symptoms. Difficulties
with sleep in an individual with a comorbid medical condition that clearly preceded the use of
any medication for treatment of that medical condition would suggest a diagnosis of insomnia
disorder, hypersomnolence disorder, or nightmare disorder with the specifier “with [specific
medical condition]” applicable to the diagnosis. Conversely, sleep symptoms that appear only
