after the initiation of a particular substance/medication suggest a substance/medication-induced
sleep disorder. If the sleep disturbance is comorbid with another medical condition and is also
exacerbated by substance use, both diagnoses are given (i.e., insomnia disorder,
hypersomnolence disorder, or nightmare disorder, “with [specific medical condition]”
respectively; and [specific substance/medication]-induced sleep disorder). When there is
insufficient evidence to determine whether the sleep disturbance is attributable to a
substance/medication or a medical condition, or independent (i.e., not attributable to either a
substance/medication or a medical condition), a diagnosis of unspecified sleep-wake disorder is
indicated.
Comorbidity
See the “Comorbidity” sections for other sleep disorders in this chapter, including insomnia
disorder, hypersomnolence disorder, central sleep apnea, sleep-related hypoventilation, and
circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders, shift work type.
Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders
The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition (ICSD-3), lists sleep disorders
“due to a medication or substance” under their respective phenotypes (e.g., hypersomnia,
movement disorder, parasomnia). ICSD-3 does not identify a separate diagnosis for “insomnia
due to a medication or substance” based on evidence that the reliability of distinguishing
specific, single etiological factors for chronic insomnia is poor.
475
Other Specified Insomnia Disorder
G47.09
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of insomnia
disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet
the full criteria for insomnia disorder or any of the disorders in the sleep-wake
disorders diagnostic class. The other specified insomnia disorder category is used in
situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate the specific reason that the
presentation does not meet the criteria for insomnia disorder or any specific sleep-
wake disorder. This is done by recording “other specified insomnia disorder” followed
by the specific reason (e.g., “short-term insomnia disorder”).
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified”
designation include the following:
1. Short-term insomnia disorder: Duration is less than 3 months.
2. Restricted to nonrestorative sleep: Predominant complaint is nonrestorative
sleep unaccompanied by other sleep symptoms such as difficulty falling asleep
or remaining asleep.
