Sexual Dysfunctions
Sexual dysfunctions include delayed ejaculation, erectile disorder, female orgasmic
disorder, female sexual interest/arousal disorder, genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder, male
hypoactive sexual desire disorder, premature (early) ejaculation, substance/medication-induced
sexual dysfunction, other specified sexual dysfunction, and unspecified sexual dysfunction.
Sexual dysfunctions are a heterogeneous group of disorders that are typically characterized by a
clinically significant disturbance in a person’s ability to respond sexually or to experience sexual
pleasure. An individual may have several sexual dysfunctions at the same time. In such cases, all
of the dysfunctions should be diagnosed.
Clinical judgment should be used to determine if the sexual difficulties are the result of
inadequate sexual stimulation; in these cases, there may still be a need for care, but a diagnosis
of a sexual dysfunction would not be made. These cases may include, but are not limited to,
conditions in which lack of knowledge about effective stimulation prevents the experience of
arousal or orgasm.
Subtypes are used to designate the onset of the difficulty. In many individuals with sexual
dysfunctions, the time of onset may indicate different etiologies and interventions. Lifelong
refers to a sexual problem that has been present from first sexual experiences, and acquired
applies to sexual dysfunctions that develop after a period of relatively normal sexual function.
Generalized refers to sexual difficulties that are not limited to certain types of stimulation,
situations, or partners, and situational refers to sexual difficulties that only occur with certain
types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
In addition to the lifelong/acquired and generalized/situational subtypes, a number of factors
must be considered during the assessment of sexual dysfunction, given that they may be relevant
to etiology or treatment and may contribute, to varying degrees, across individuals: 1) partner
factors (e.g., partner’s sexual problems; partner’s health status); 2) relationship factors (e.g., poor
communication; discrepancies in desire for sexual activity); 3) individual vulnerability factors
(e.g., poor body image; history of sexual or emotional abuse), psychiatric comorbidity (e.g.,
depression, anxiety), or stressors (e.g., job loss, bereavement); 4) cultural or religious factors
(e.g., inhibitions related to prohibitions against sexual activity or pleasure; attitudes toward
sexuality); and 5) medical factors relevant to prognosis, course, or treatment.
Clinical judgment about the diagnosis of sexual dysfunction should take into consideration
cultural factors that may influence expectations or engender prohibitions about the experience of
sexual pleasure. Aging and relationship duration may be associated with a normative decrease in
sexual response.
Sexual response has a requisite biological underpinning, yet is usually experienced in an
intrapersonal, interpersonal, and cultural context. Thus, sexual function involves a complex
interaction among biological, sociocultural, and psychological factors. In many clinical contexts,
a precise understanding of the etiology of a sexual problem is unknown. Nonetheless, a sexual
