F52.32
dysfunction diagnosis requires ruling out problems that are better explained by a nonsexual
mental disorder, by the effects of a substance (e.g., drug or
478
medication), by a medical condition (e.g., due to pelvic nerve damage), or by severe
relationship distress, partner violence, or other stressors.
The population of gender-diverse persons, including transgender, nonbinary, and agender,
may not identify with or appear to fit into the existing sex- and gender-based diagnostic
categories described in this chapter. Despite the names given to male hypoactive sexual desire
disorder and female sexual interest arousal disorder, the diagnostic criteria describe symptoms
and experiences that are not dependent on the individual’s specific sex or gender. As such, either
diagnosis can be applied to gender-diverse individuals based on clinical judgment. For diagnoses
linked to reproductive anatomy (e.g., erectile dysfunction, premature [early] ejaculation, delayed
ejaculation, and genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder), diagnoses should be based on the
individual’s current anatomy and not on the individual’s sex assigned at birth. Much more
research is needed to understand experiences of sexual dysfunction among gender-diverse
persons. In the meantime, as with all categories in DSM, clinicians should use their best
judgment.
If the sexual dysfunction is mostly explainable by another nonsexual mental disorder (e.g.,
depressive or bipolar disorder, anxiety disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, psychotic
disorder), then only the other mental disorder diagnosis should be made. If the problem is
thought to be better explained by the use/misuse or discontinuation of a drug or substance, it
should be diagnosed accordingly as a substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction. If the
sexual dysfunction is attributable to another medical condition (e.g., peripheral neuropathy), the
person would not receive a psychiatric diagnosis. If severe relationship distress, partner violence,
or significant stressors better explain the sexual difficulties, then a sexual dysfunction diagnosis
is not made, but an appropriate Z code for the relationship problem or stressor may be listed
(e.g., Z63.0 Relationship distress with spouse or intimate partner); see the chapter “Other
Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention.” In many cases, a precise etiological
relationship between another condition (e.g., a medical condition) and a sexual dysfunction
cannot be established. It is possible to have a diagnosis of a sexual dysfunction and a coexisting
medical condition, nonsexual mental disorder, or use/misuse or discontinuation of a drug or
substance; and it is possible to have one or more diagnoses of sexual dysfunction.
Delayed Ejaculation
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Either of the following symptoms must be experienced on almost all or all
occasions (approximately 75%–100%) of partnered sexual activity (in identified
situational contexts or, if generalized, in all contexts), and without the individual
desiring delay:
