1. Marked delay in ejaculation.
2. Marked infrequency or absence of ejaculation.
B. The symptoms in Criterion A have persisted for a minimum duration of
approximately 6 months.
C. The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress in the individual.
D. The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or
as a consequence of severe relationship distress or other significant stressors
and is not attributable to the effects of a substance/medication or another
medical condition.
Specify whether:
Lifelong: The disturbance has been present since the individual became
sexually active.
Acquired: The disturbance began after a period of relatively normal sexual
function.
479
Specify whether:
Generalized: Not limited to certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
Situational: Only occurs with certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Evidence of mild distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
Moderate: Evidence of moderate distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
Severe: Evidence of severe or extreme distress over the symptoms in Criterion
A.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of delayed ejaculation is a marked delay in or inability to achieve
ejaculation or marked infrequency of ejaculation on all or almost all occasions of partnered
sexual activity, despite the presence of adequate sexual stimulation and the desire to ejaculate
(Criterion A). In order to qualify for a DSM-5 diagnosis of delayed ejaculation, the symptoms
must have persisted for a minimum duration of approximately 6 months (Criterion B) and must
cause clinically significant distress in the individual (Criterion C). The partnered sexual activity
may include manual, oral, coital, or anal stimulation. In most cases, the diagnosis will be made
by self-report, although for men in heterosexual partnered relationships, it is frequently the
female partner’s distress that motivates treatment seeking. It is common for men who present
with delayed ejaculation to be able to ejaculate with self-stimulation, but not during partnered
sexual activity.
The definition of “delay” does not have precise boundaries, as there is no consensus as to
what constitutes a reasonable time to reach orgasm or what is unacceptably long for most men
and their sexual partners. Although the definitions of delayed ejaculation apply equally well to
