both heterosexual and homosexual orientation, the vast majority of the research focus has been
based on the concept of intravaginal latency, and therefore male-female intercourse. The findings
from those studies document that the majority of men’s intravaginal ejaculatory latency time
(IELT) range is approximately 4–10 minutes. There is also no clear diagnostic delineation
between delayed ejaculation as a sexual dysfunction and delay that is a consequence of normal
aging. Therefore, the diagnosis of delayed ejaculation is based on clinical judgment, taking into
consideration the individual’s psychosexual and medical history, age, relationship context, and
sexual stimulation patterns and behaviors. The diagnosis of delayed ejaculation should not be
given if the clinician judges that the individual’s dissatisfaction is entirely attributable to
unrealistic expectations.
Associated Features
The man and his partner may report prolonged thrusting to achieve orgasm to the point of
exhaustion or genital discomfort and sometimes even injury to himself and/or his partner before
finally ceasing. Some males may report avoiding sexual activity because of a repetitive pattern of
difficulty ejaculating.
Delayed ejaculation is associated with highly frequent masturbation, use of masturbation
techniques not easily duplicated by a partner, and marked disparities between sexual fantasies
during masturbation and the reality of sex with a partner.
Males with delayed ejaculation typically report less coital activity, higher levels of
relationship distress, sexual dissatisfaction, lower subjective arousal, anxiety about their sexual
performance, and general health issues than sexually functional men.
In addition to considerations of applicable subtypes (i.e., whether the ejaculatory delay has
been present since the individual became sexually active or began after a period of relatively
normal sexual function, and whether the ejaculatory delay is generalized or occurs only with
certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners), the following factors are important to
consider in the assessment of delayed ejaculation: 1) partner factors (e.g., partner’s sexual
problems or health); 2) relationship factors (e.g., poor communication, discrepancies
480
in desire for sexual activity); 3) individual vulnerability factors (e.g., hypoactive sexual
desire), psychiatric comorbidity (e.g., depression, anxiety), or stressors such as job loss or stress;
4) cultural/religious factors (e.g., inhibitions related to prohibitions against sexual activity;
attitudes toward sexuality); 5) medical factors, particularly hypogonadism or neurological
disorders (e.g., multiple sclerosis, diabetic neuropathy); and 6) use of substances or medications
that might inhibit ejaculation (e.g., use of serotonergic drugs).
Prevalence
The prevalence of delayed ejaculation in the United States is estimated at 1%–5% but has ranged
as high as 11% in international studies. However, variation in syndrome definitions across
studies may have contributed to differences in the prevalence of the DSM-5 disorder.
Development and Course
