Genetic and physiological.
Another medical condition or injury and/or its treatment.
Lifelong delayed ejaculation begins with early sexual experiences and continues throughout the
course of an individual’s life. Acquired delayed ejaculation begins after a period of normal
sexual function. A number of biomedical, psychosocial, and cultural factors can contribute to the
predisposition to or maintenance of lifelong or acquired delayed ejaculation (see the section
“Risk and Prognostic Factors”), and either subtype can be generalized or situational in nature.
The prevalence of delayed ejaculation increases with age. As males age, they are more likely
to have progressively more of the following changes in ejaculatory function, including, but not
limited to, reduced ejaculatory volume, force, and sensation, and increased “refractory time.”
Refractory latency increases for males secondary to surgical, medical, and pharmaceutical
complications, as well as aging.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Ejaculatory latency is an end point consequence that is determined by a range of factors. A large
number of psychosocial factors increase the probability of an individual experiencing delayed
ejaculation, with depression and relationship dissatisfaction being predominant contributors.
Numerous medical conditions may lead to delayed ejaculation,
including procedures that disrupt sympathetic or somatic innervation to the genital region such as
radical prostatectomy for cancer treatment. Neurological and endocrine disorders, including
spinal cord injury, stroke, multiple sclerosis, pelvic-region surgery, severe diabetes, epilepsy,
hormonal abnormalities, and sleep apnea, as well as alcohol abuse, bowel dysfunction, cannabis
use, and environmental factors, may be associated with delayed ejaculation.
Additionally, medications that inhibit α-adrenergic innervation of the ejaculatory system
(e.g., tamsulosin) are associated with delayed ejaculation, as well as antihypertensive agents,
antidepressants (e.g., selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors), and antipsychotic drugs.
Age-related loss of the fast-conducting peripheral sensory nerves and age-related decreased
sex steroid secretion may be associated with an increase in delayed ejaculation in males as they
age. Reduced androgen levels with age may also be associated with delayed ejaculation.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
By definition, the diagnosis of delayed ejaculation is only given to males. Distressing difficulties
with orgasm in women would be considered under female orgasmic disorder.
481
Functional Consequences of Delayed Ejaculation
Delayed ejaculation is often associated with considerable psychological distress in one or both
partners.
Difficulty with ejaculation may contribute to difficulties in conception and lead to significant
fertility assessment, as the lack of ejaculation is not often spontaneously discussed by individuals
unless there is direct inquiry from their physician.
Differential Diagnosis
A 
major 
diagnostic 
challenge 
is
