Substance/medication use.
Dysfunction with orgasm.
F52.21
differentiating between a delayed ejaculation that is fully explained by another medical condition
or injury (or its treatment) and a delayed ejaculation attributable to a variety of proportionally
different biomedical-psychosocial and cultural factors that determine the symptom(s). A number
of medical conditions or injuries, along with their treatments, may produce delays in ejaculation
independent of psychosocial and cultural issues.
Delayed ejaculation must be differentiated from a number of urological conditions
(especially other ejaculatory disorders), including retrograde ejaculation or anejaculation, which
is typically the result of etiologies ranging from hormonal to neurological and/or anatomical
abnormalities, including ejaculatory duct obstruction and other urological disorders.
A number of pharmacological agents, such as antidepressants,
antipsychotics, α sympathetic drugs, alcohol, and opioid drugs, can cause ejaculatory problems.
In such cases, the diagnosis is substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction instead of
delayed ejaculation.
It is important in the history to ascertain whether the complaint concerns
delayed ejaculation or the sensation of orgasm, or both. Ejaculation occurs in the genitals,
whereas the experience of orgasm is believed to be primarily subjective. Ejaculation and orgasm
usually occur together but not always. For example, a male with a normal ejaculatory pattern
may complain of decreased pleasure (i.e., anhedonic ejaculation). Such a complaint would not be
coded as delayed ejaculation but could be coded as other specified sexual dysfunction or
unspecified sexual dysfunction.
Comorbidity
There is some evidence to suggest that delayed ejaculation may be more common in severe
forms of major depressive disorder.
Erectile Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. At least one of the three following symptoms must be experienced on almost all
or all (approximately 75%–100%) occasions of sexual activity (in identified
situational contexts or, if generalized, in all contexts):
1. Marked difficulty in obtaining an erection during sexual activity.
2. Marked difficulty in maintaining an erection until the completion of sexual
activity.
3. Marked decrease in erectile rigidity.
B. The symptoms in Criterion A have persisted for a minimum duration of
approximately 6 months.
C. The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress in the individual.
482
