D. The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or
as a consequence of severe relationship distress or other significant stressors
and is not attributable to the effects of a substance/medication or another
medical condition.
Specify whether:
Lifelong: The disturbance has been present since the individual became
sexually active.
Acquired: The disturbance began after a period of relatively normal sexual
function.
Specify whether:
Generalized: Not limited to certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
Situational: Only occurs with certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Evidence of mild distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
Moderate: Evidence of moderate distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
Severe: Evidence of severe or extreme distress over the symptoms in Criterion
A.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of erectile disorder is a marked difficulty in obtaining or maintaining an
erection or a marked decrease in erectile rigidity in all or almost all occasions of sexual activity
(Criterion A) that has persisted for at least 6 months (Criterion B) and that causes clinically
significant distress in the individual (Criterion C). A careful sexual history is necessary to
ascertain that the problem has been present for a significant duration of time (i.e., at least
approximately 6 months) and occurs on the majority of sexual occasions (i.e., at least 75% of the
time). Symptoms may occur only in specific situations involving certain types of stimulation or
partners, or they may occur in a generalized manner in all types of situations, stimulation, or
partners.
This chapter uses the terms erectile disorder and erectile dysfunction, which are not
synonymous. Erectile dysfunction is a widely used descriptive term (including in ICD-10) that
refers to difficulty getting and maintaining an erection. Erectile disorder is the more specific
DSM-5 diagnostic category in which erectile dysfunction persists for at least 6 months and
causes distress in the individual.
Associated Features
Many males with erectile disorder may have low self-esteem, low self-confidence, and a
decreased sense of masculinity, and may experience depressed mood. Erectile dysfunction is also
strongly associated with feelings of guilt, self-blame, sense of failure, anger, and concern about
disappointing one’s partner. Fear and/or avoidance of future sexual encounters may occur.
Decreased sexual satisfaction and reduced sexual desire in the individual’s partner are common.
In addition to considerations of applicable subtypes (i.e., whether the erectile dysfunction has
