been present since the individual became sexually active or began after a period of relatively
normal sexual function, and whether the erectile dysfunction is generalized or occurs only with
certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners), the following factors are important to
consider in the assessment of erectile disorder: 1) partner factors (e.g., partner’s sexual problems
or health); 2) relationship factors (e.g., poor communication, discrepancies in desire for sexual
activity); 3) individual vulnerability factors (e.g., hypoactive sexual desire), psychiatric
comorbidity (e.g., depression, anxiety), or stressors such as job loss or stress; 4) cultural/religious
factors (e.g., inhibitions related to prohibitions against sexual activity; attitudes toward
sexuality); 5) medical factors, particularly surgery (e.g., transurethral resection of the prostate),
hypogonadism, or neurological conditions
483
(e.g., multiple sclerosis, diabetic neuropathy); and 6) use of substances or medications that
might inhibit ejaculation (e.g., use of serotonergic drugs).
Prevalence
The prevalence of lifelong versus acquired erectile disorder is unknown. There is a strong age-
related increase in both prevalence and incidence of problems with erection, particularly after
age 50 years. Internationally, the prevalence of erectile disorder in the general population is
approximately 13%–21% of males ages 40–80 years. Rates appear to be lower than 10% in
males younger than 40 years, about 20%–40% in males in their 60s, and 50%–75% in males
older than 70 years. In a longitudinal study in Australia, 80% of males age 70 and older
experienced erectile disorder. In a review of studies largely from Western countries, about 20%
of males feared erectile problems on their first sexual experience, whereas approximately 8%
experienced erectile problems that hindered penetration during their first sexual experience.
Among U.S.-based respondents to an online survey, there was no statistically significant
difference in the prevalence of erectile disorder by ethnoracial background. Nationally
representative U.S. data show that the prevalence of erectile difficulties is similar in older males
who have sex with males or with both males and females.
Development and Course
Erectile failure on first sexual attempt has been found to be related to having sex with a
previously unknown partner, concomitant use of drugs or alcohol, not wanting to have sex, and
peer pressure. There is minimal evidence regarding the persistence of such problems after the
first attempt. It is assumed that most of these problems spontaneously remit without professional
intervention, but some males may continue to have episodic problems. In contrast, acquired
erectile disorder is often associated with biological factors such as diabetes and cardiovascular
disease. Acquired erectile disorder is likely to be persistent in most men.
The natural history of lifelong erectile disorder is unknown. Clinical observation supports the
association of lifelong erectile disorder with psychological factors that are self-limiting or
responsive to psychological interventions, whereas, as noted above, acquired erectile disorder is
more likely to be related to biological factors and to be persistent. The incidence of erectile
disorder increases with age. A minority of males diagnosed as having moderate erectile failure
