Course modifiers.
may experience spontaneous remission of symptoms without medical intervention. Distress
associated with erectile disorder is lower in older males as compared with younger males.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Risk factors for acquired erectile dysfunction and, as a consequence, erectile
disorder include age, smoking tobacco, lack of physical exercise, diabetes, and decreased desire.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Prevalence of erectile disorder varies across countries. It is unclear to what extent these
variations represent differences in cultural expectations as opposed to genuine differences in the
frequency of erectile failure. Differential endorsement may be related to cultural concerns about
appearing weak or less masculine or to diverse cultural norms about changes in erectile function
during healthy aging. Cultural expectations concerning marital relationships, sexual
performance, fertility, and gender roles can influence anxieties that may contribute to erectile
disorder. Based on responses to an online survey, erectile disorder may be associated with
concern about genital size in the United States and the Middle East and with fears of male
infertility more frequently in the Middle East.
484
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
By definition, the diagnosis of erectile dysfunction is only given to males. Distressing difficulties
with sexual arousal in women would be considered under female sexual interest/arousal disorder.
Diagnostic Markers
Nocturnal penile tumescence testing and measured erectile turgidity during sleep can be
employed to help differentiate organic from psychogenic erectile problems on the assumption
that adequate erections during rapid eye movement sleep indicate a psychological etiology to the
problem. A number of other diagnostic procedures may be employed depending on the
clinician’s assessment of their relevance given the individual’s age, comorbid medical problems,
and clinical presentation. Doppler ultrasonography and intravascular injection of vasoactive
drugs, as well as invasive diagnostic procedures such as dynamic infusion cavernosography, can
be used to assess vascular integrity. Pudendal nerve conduction studies, including somatosensory
evoked potentials, can be employed when a peripheral neuropathy is suspected. Testing for low
levels of serum bioavailable or free testosterone is appropriate especially when diabetes is
present, for men who also experience hypoactive desire, and for those who do not respond to
phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors. Thyroid function may also be assessed. Determination of
fasting serum glucose is useful to screen for the presence of diabetes mellitus. The assessment of
serum lipids is important, as erectile disorder in males 40 years and older is predictive of the
future risk for coronary artery disease.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Among males receiving treatment for erectile disorder with comorbid depression, elevated rates
