Nonsexual mental disorders.
Normal erectile function.
Substance/medication use.
Another medical condition.
of suicidal thoughts or behavior have been observed; while the affected males attributed the
suicidal symptoms to their erectile disorder, the presence of depression was also a likely
contributing factor. Elevated suicide rates among males with prostate cancer may in part be
related to treatment-associated erectile dysfunction and consequent depressive symptoms.
Functional Consequences of Erectile Disorder
Erectile disorder can interfere with fertility and produce both individual and interpersonal
distress. Fear and/or avoidance of sexual encounters may interfere with the ability to develop
intimate relationships. Significant psychological distress may occur among males presenting
with erectile disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Major depressive disorder and erectile disorder are closely associated,
and erectile disorder accompanying severe depressive disorder may occur. If the erectile
difficulties are better explained by another mental disorder, such as major depression, then a
diagnosis of erectile disorder would not be made.
The differential should include consideration of normal erectile function
in males with excessive expectations.
An onset of erectile dysfunction that coincides with the beginning of
substance/medication use and that dissipates with discontinuation of the substance/medication or
dose reduction is suggestive of a substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction, which
should be diagnosed instead of erectile disorder.
485
The most difficult aspect of the differential diagnosis of erectile
disorder is ruling out erectile problems that are fully explained by medical factors. Such cases
would not receive a diagnosis of a mental disorder. The distinction between erectile disorder as a
mental disorder and erectile dysfunction as the result of another medical condition is usually
unclear, and many cases will have complex, interactive biological and psychiatric etiologies. If
the individual is older than 40–50 years and/or has concomitant medical problems, the
differential diagnosis should include medical etiologies, especially vascular disease. The
presence of an organic disease known to cause erectile problems does not confirm a causal
relationship. For example, a male with diabetes mellitus can develop erectile disorder in response
to psychological stress. In general, erectile dysfunction due to organic factors is generalized and
gradual in onset. An exception would be erectile problems after traumatic injury to the nervous
innervation of the genital organs (e.g., spinal cord injury). Erectile problems that are situational
and inconsistent and that have an acute onset after a stressful life event are most often
attributable to psychological events. An age younger than 40 years is also suggestive of a
psychological etiology to the difficulty.
Comorbidity
Erectile disorder can be comorbid with other sexual diagnoses, such as premature (early)
