F52.31
ejaculation and male hypoactive sexual desire disorder, as well as with anxiety and depressive
disorders. The risk of depression is significantly higher in males with erectile disorder, with a
markedly higher risk of depression in the first year after onset. In males diagnosed with
posttraumatic stress disorder, erectile problems are common. Erectile disorder is common in
males with lower urinary tract symptoms related to prostatic hypertrophy. Erectile disorder may
be comorbid with dyslipidemia, cardiovascular disease, hypogonadism, multiple sclerosis,
diabetes mellitus, and other diseases that interfere with the vascular, neurological, or endocrine
function necessary for normal erectile function.
Female Orgasmic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Presence of either of the following symptoms and experienced on almost all or
all (approximately 75%–100%) occasions of sexual activity (in identified
situational contexts or, if generalized, in all contexts):
1. Marked delay in, marked infrequency of, or absence of orgasm.
2. Markedly reduced intensity of orgasmic sensations.
B. The symptoms in Criterion A have persisted for a minimum duration of
approximately 6 months.
C. The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress in the individual.
D. The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or
as a consequence of severe relationship distress (e.g., partner violence) or other
significant 
stressors 
and 
is 
not 
attributable 
to 
the 
effects 
of 
a
substance/medication or another medical condition.
Specify whether:
Lifelong: The disturbance has been present since the individual became
sexually active.
Acquired: The disturbance began after a period of relatively normal sexual
function.
486
Specify whether:
Generalized: Not limited to certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
Situational: Only occurs with certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
Specify if:
Never experienced an orgasm under any situation.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Evidence of mild distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
