Moderate: Evidence of moderate distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
Severe: Evidence of severe or extreme distress over the symptoms in Criterion
A.
Diagnostic Features
Female orgasmic disorder is characterized by difficulty experiencing orgasm and/or markedly
reduced intensity of orgasmic sensations (Criterion A). Women show wide variability in the type
or intensity of stimulation that elicits orgasm. Similarly, subjective descriptions of orgasm are
extremely varied, suggesting that it is experienced in very different ways, both across women
and on different occasions by the same woman. For a diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder,
symptoms must be experienced on almost all or all (approximately 75%–100%) occasions of
sexual activity (in identified situational contexts or, if generalized, in all contexts) and have a
minimum duration of approximately 6 months. The use of the minimum severity and duration
criteria is intended to distinguish transient orgasm difficulties from more persistent orgasmic
dysfunction. The inclusion of “approximately” in Criterion B allows for clinician judgment in
cases in which symptom duration does not meet the recommended 6-month threshold.
For a woman to have a diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder, clinically significant distress
must accompany the symptoms (Criterion C). In many cases of orgasm problems, the causes are
multifactorial or cannot be determined. If female orgasmic disorder is deemed to be better
explained by another mental disorder, the effects of a substance/medication, or a medical
condition, then a diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder would not be made. Finally, if
interpersonal or significant contextual factors, such as severe relationship distress, intimate
partner violence, or other significant stressors, are present, then a diagnosis of female orgasmic
disorder would not be made.
Many women require clitoral stimulation to reach orgasm, and a relatively small proportion
of women report that they always experience orgasm during penile-vaginal intercourse. Thus, a
woman’s experiencing orgasm through clitoral stimulation but not during intercourse does not
meet criteria for a clinical diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder. It is also important to consider
whether orgasm difficulties are the result of inadequate sexual stimulation; in these cases, there
may still be a need for care, but a diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder would not be made.
Associated Features
Associations between specific patterns of personality traits or psychopathology and orgasmic
dysfunction have generally not been supported. Compared with women without the disorder,
some women with female orgasmic disorder may have greater difficulty communicating about
sexual issues. Overall sexual satisfaction, however, is not strongly correlated with orgasmic
experience. Many women report high levels of sexual satisfaction despite rarely or never
experiencing orgasm. Orgasm difficulties in women often co-occur with problems related to
sexual interest and arousal.
In addition to the subtypes “lifelong/acquired” and “generalized/situational,” the following
five factors must be considered during assessment and diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder
given that they may be relevant to etiology or treatment: 1) partner factors (e.g., partner’s sexual
problems, partner’s health status); 2) relationship factors (e.g., poor
