Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
487
communication, discrepancies in desire for sexual activity); 3) individual vulnerability
factors (e.g., poor body image, history of sexual or emotional abuse), psychiatric comorbidity
(e.g., depression, anxiety), or stressors (e.g., job loss, bereavement); 4) cultural/religious factors
(e.g., inhibitions related to prohibitions against sexual activity; attitudes toward sexuality); and 5)
medical factors relevant to prognosis, course, or treatment. Each of these factors may contribute
differently to the presenting symptoms of different women with this disorder.
Prevalence
Reported prevalence rates for orgasm problems in premenopausal women vary widely, from 8%
to 72%, depending on multiple factors (e.g., age, cultural background and context, duration,
severity of symptoms); however, these estimates do not take into account the presence of
distress. Only a proportion of women experiencing orgasm difficulties also report associated
distress. Variation in how symptoms are assessed (e.g., the duration of symptoms and the recall
period) also influence prevalence rates. Internationally, approximately 10% of women do not
experience orgasm throughout their lifetime.
Development and Course
By definition, lifelong female orgasmic disorder indicates that the orgasm difficulties have
always been present, whereas the acquired subtype would be assigned if the woman’s orgasm
difficulties developed after a period of normal orgasmic functioning.
A woman’s first experience of orgasm can occur any time from the prepubertal period to well
into adulthood. Women show a more variable pattern in age at first orgasm than do men, and
women’s reports of having experienced orgasm increase with age. Many women learn to
experience orgasm as they experience a wide variety of stimulation and acquire more knowledge
about their bodies. Women’s rates of orgasmic consistency (defined as “usually or always”
experiencing orgasm) are higher during masturbation than during sexual activity with a partner.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
A wide range of psychological factors, such as anxiety and concerns about
pregnancy, can potentially interfere with a woman’s ability to experience orgasm.
There is a strong association between relationship problems, physical health, and
mental health and orgasm difficulties in women. Sociocultural factors (e.g., gender role
expectations and religious norms) are also important influences on the experience of orgasm
difficulties.
Many physiological factors may influence a woman’s experience of
orgasm, including medical conditions and medications. Conditions such as multiple sclerosis,
pelvic nerve damage from radical hysterectomy, and spinal cord injury can all influence
orgasmic functioning in women. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are known to delay or
inhibit orgasm in women. Women with vulvovaginal atrophy (characterized by symptoms such
as vaginal dryness, itching, and pain) are significantly more likely to report orgasm difficulties
than are women without this condition. Menopausal status is not consistently associated with the
