Nonsexual mental disorders.
likelihood of orgasm difficulties. There may be a significant genetic contribution to variation in
female orgasmic function. However, psychological, sociocultural, and physiological factors
likely interact in complex ways to influence women’s experience of orgasm and of orgasm
difficulties.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The degree to which lack of orgasm in women is regarded as a problem that requires treatment
may vary depending on cultural context. Cultural views that undervalue women’s
488
sexual satisfaction or that perceive marital sex as a duty for women rather than a pleasurable
activity are associated with lower help-seeking. In addition, women differ in how important
orgasm is to their sexual satisfaction. There may be marked sociocultural and generational
differences in women’s orgasmic ability. For example, reports of the prevalence of inability to
reach orgasm vary over a twofold range across world regions.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
By definition, the diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder is given only to women. Distressing
difficulties with orgasm in men would be considered under delayed ejaculation.
Diagnostic Markers
Although measurable physiological changes occur during female orgasm, including changes in
hormones, pelvic floor musculature, and brain activation, there is significant variability in these
indicators of orgasm across women. In clinical situations, the diagnosis of female orgasmic
disorder is based on a woman’s self-report.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Dysfunctions of sexual arousal and satisfaction have been associated with suicidal thoughts
among female veterans and military service members even after adjustment for probable
posttraumatic stress disorder, probable depression, history of deployment, married status, age,
service in the army, and race.
Functional Consequences of Female Orgasmic Disorder
The functional consequences of female orgasmic disorder are unclear. Although there is a strong
association between relationship problems and orgasm difficulties in women, it is unclear
whether relationship factors are risk factors for orgasm difficulties or are consequences of those
difficulties.
Differential Diagnosis
If the orgasm difficulties are better explained by another mental
disorder, such as major depression, then a diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder would not be
made.
