Substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction.
Another medical condition.
Interpersonal factors.
Other sexual dysfunctions.
F52.22
An onset of orgasmic dysfunction that coincides
with the beginning of substance/medication use and that dissipates with discontinuation of the
substance/medication or dose reduction is suggestive of a substance/medication-induced sexual
dysfunction, which should be diagnosed instead of female orgasmic disorder.
If the disorder is attributable to another medical condition (e.g.,
multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury), then a diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder would not be
made.
If interpersonal or significant contextual factors, such as severe relationship
distress, intimate partner violence, or other significant stressors, are associated with the orgasm
difficulties, then a diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder would not be made.
Female orgasmic disorder may occur in association with other sexual
dysfunctions (e.g., female sexual interest/arousal disorder). The presence of another sexual
dysfunction does not rule out a diagnosis of female orgasmic disorder. Occasional orgasm
difficulties that are short-term or infrequent and are not accompanied by clinically significant
distress or impairment are not diagnosed as female orgasmic disorder. A diagnosis is also not
appropriate if the problems are the result of inadequate sexual stimulation.
489
Comorbidity
Women with female orgasmic disorder may have co-occurring sexual interest/arousal
difficulties. Women with diagnoses of other nonsexual mental disorders, such as major
depressive disorder, may experience lower sexual interest/arousal, and this may indirectly
increase the likelihood of orgasm difficulties.
Female Sexual Interest/Arousal Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Lack of, or significantly reduced, sexual interest/arousal, as manifested by at
least three of the following:
1. Absent/reduced interest in sexual activity.
2. Absent/reduced sexual/erotic thoughts or fantasies.
3. No/reduced initiation of sexual activity, and typically unreceptive to a partner’s
attempts to initiate.
4. Absent/reduced sexual excitement/pleasure during sexual activity in almost
all or all (approximately 75%–100%) sexual encounters (in identified
situational contexts or, if generalized, in all contexts).
5. Absent/reduced sexual interest/arousal in response to any internal or external
sexual/erotic cues (e.g., written, verbal, visual).
6. Absent/reduced genital or nongenital sensations during sexual activity in
