almost all or all (approximately 75%–100%) sexual encounters (in identified
situational contexts or, if generalized, in all contexts).
B. The symptoms in Criterion A have persisted for a minimum duration of
approximately 6 months.
C. The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress in the individual.
D. The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or
as a consequence of severe relationship distress (e.g., partner violence) or other
significant 
stressors 
and 
is 
not 
attributable 
to 
the 
effects 
of 
a
substance/medication or another medical condition.
Specify whether:
Lifelong: The disturbance has been present since the individual became
sexually active.
Acquired: The disturbance began after a period of relatively normal sexual
function.
Specify whether:
Generalized: Not limited to certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
Situational: Only occurs with certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Evidence of mild distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
Moderate: Evidence of moderate distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
Severe: Evidence of severe or extreme distress over the symptoms in Criterion
A.
Diagnostic Features
In assessing female sexual interest/arousal disorder, interpersonal context must be taken into
account. A “desire discrepancy,” in which a woman has lower desire for sexual activity than her
partner, is not sufficient to diagnose female sexual interest/arousal disorder. For the criteria for
the disorder to be met, there must be absence or reduced frequency or
490
intensity of at least three of six indicators (Criterion A) for a minimum duration of approximately
6 months (Criterion B). There may be different symptom profiles across women, as well as
variability in how sexual interest and arousal are expressed. For example, in one woman, sexual
interest/arousal disorder may be expressed as a lack of interest in sexual activity, an absence of
erotic or sexual thoughts, and reluctance to initiate sexual activity and respond to a partner’s
sexual invitations. In another woman, an inability to become sexually excited, an inability to
respond to sexual stimuli with sexual desire, and a corresponding lack of signs of physical sexual
arousal may be the primary features. Difficulties in desire and sexual arousal may also occur
simultaneously, as women with loss of sexual desire may be nine times more likely to also have
lost sexual excitement or arousal. Short-term changes in sexual interest or arousal are common
