and may be adaptive responses to events in a woman’s life and do not represent a sexual
dysfunction. Diagnosis of female sexual interest/arousal disorder requires a minimum duration of
symptoms of approximately 6 months as a reflection that the symptoms must be a persistent
problem. The estimation of persistence may be determined by clinical judgment when a duration
of 6 months cannot be ascertained precisely.
There may be absent or reduced frequency or intensity of interest in sexual activity (Criterion
A1), which was previously the single criterion for hypoactive sexual desire disorder; this
condition is now represented by female sexual interest/arousal disorder. The frequency or
intensity of sexual and erotic thoughts or fantasies may be absent or reduced (Criterion A2). The
expression of fantasies varies widely across women and may include memories of past sexual
experiences. The normative decline in sexual thoughts with age should be taken into account
when this criterion is being assessed. Absence or reduced frequency of initiating sexual activity
and of receptivity to a partner’s sexual invitations (Criterion A3) is a behaviorally focused
criterion. A couple’s beliefs and preferences for sexual initiation patterns are highly relevant to
the assessment of this criterion. There may be absent or reduced sexual excitement or pleasure
during sexual activity in almost all or all (approximately 75%–100%) sexual encounters
(Criterion A4). Lack of pleasure is a common presenting clinical complaint in women with low
desire. Among women who report low sexual desire, there are fewer sexual or erotic cues that
elicit sexual interest or arousal (i.e., there is a lack of “responsive desire”). Evidence suggests
that there may be at least two types of female sexual interest/arousal disorder: one based on low
sensitivity to sexual cues and a second based on overactivation of sexual inhibition. Assessment
of the adequacy of sexual stimuli will assist in determining if there is a difficulty with responsive
sexual desire (Criterion A5). Frequency or intensity of genital or nongenital sensations during
sexual activity may be reduced or absent (Criterion A6). This may include reduced vaginal
lubrication/vasocongestion, but because physiological measures of genital sexual response do not
differentiate women who report sexual arousal concerns from those who do not, the self-report of
reduced or absent genital or nongenital sensations is sufficient.
For a diagnosis of female sexual interest/arousal disorder to be made, clinically significant
distress must accompany the symptoms in Criterion A. Distress may be experienced as a result of
the lack of sexual interest/arousal or as a result of significant interference in a woman’s life and
well-being. If a lifelong lack of sexual desire is better explained by one’s self-identification as
“asexual,” then a diagnosis of female sexual interest/arousal disorder would not be made.
Associated Features
Female sexual interest/arousal disorder is frequently associated with problems in experiencing
orgasm, pain experienced during sexual activity, infrequent sexual activity, and couple-level
discrepancies in desire. Relationship difficulties, chronic stress, and mood disorders are also
frequently associated features of female sexual interest/arousal disorder. Unrealistic expectations
and norms regarding the “appropriate” level of sexual
491
interest or arousal, along with poor sexual techniques and lack of information about sexuality,
may also be evident in women diagnosed with female sexual interest/arousal disorder. The latter,
