Temperamental.
as well as normative beliefs about gender roles, are important factors to consider.
In addition to the subtypes “lifelong/acquired” and “generalized/situational,” the following
five factors must be considered during assessment and diagnosis of female sexual interest/arousal
disorder given that they may be relevant to etiology and/or treatment: 1) partner factors (e.g.,
partner’s sexual problems, partner’s health status, partner-related distress); 2) relationship factors
(e.g., poor communication, discrepancies in desire for sexual activity; relationship duration); 3)
individual vulnerability factors (e.g., poor body image, history of sexual or emotional abuse),
psychiatric comorbidity (e.g., depression, anxiety), or stressors (e.g., job loss, bereavement); 4)
cultural/religious factors (e.g., inhibitions related to prohibitions against sexual activity; attitudes
toward sexuality); and 5) medical factors relevant to prognosis, course, or treatment. Note that
each of these factors may contribute differently to the presenting symptoms of different women
with this disorder.
Prevalence
Approximately 30% of women experience chronic low desire, with approximately half of these
experiencing significant partner-related distress and a quarter experiencing personal distress. The
prevalence of low sexual desire and of problems with sexual arousal (with and without
associated distress) may vary markedly in relation to age, cultural context, duration of symptoms,
and presence of distress. Regarding duration of symptoms, there are striking differences in
prevalence estimates between short-term and persistent problems related to lack of sexual
interest. When distress about sexual functioning is required, prevalence estimates are markedly
lower. Though there is a strong relationship between low desire and age, the prevalence of sex-
related distress associated with low desire decreases as women age.
Development and Course
By definition, lifelong female sexual interest/arousal disorder suggests that the lack of sexual
interest or arousal has been present for the woman’s entire sexual life. For Criteria A3, A4, and
A6, which assess functioning during sexual activity, a subtype of lifelong would mean presence
of symptoms since the individual’s first sexual experiences. The acquired subtype would be
assigned if the difficulties with sexual interest or arousal developed after a period of
nonproblematic sexual functioning. Adaptive and normative changes in sexual functioning may
result from partner-related, interpersonal, or personal events and may be transient in nature.
However, persistence of symptoms for approximately 6 months or more would constitute a
sexual dysfunction.
There are normative changes in sexual interest and arousal across the life span. Furthermore,
women in relationships of longer duration are more likely to report engaging in sex despite no
obvious feelings of sexual desire at the outset of a sexual encounter compared with women in
shorter-duration relationships. Vaginal dryness in older women is related to age and menopausal
status.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental factors include negative cognitions and attitudes about sexuality
and past history of mental disorders. Differences in propensity for sexual excitation and sexual
