Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Nonsexual mental disorders.
inhibition may also predict the likelihood of developing sexual problems.
Environmental 
factors 
include 
relationship 
difficulties, 
partner 
sexual
functioning, and developmental history, such as early relationships with caregivers and
childhood stressors.
492
Some medical conditions (e.g., diabetes mellitus, thyroid dysfunction)
can be risk factors for female sexual interest/arousal disorder. There appears to be a strong
influence of genetic factors on vulnerability to sexual problems in women. Psychophysiological
research using vaginal photoplethysmography has not found differences between women with
and without perceived lack of genital arousal.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
There is marked variability in reported prevalence rates of low desire across world regions,
ranging from 26% to 43%. Low levels of sexual desire have been reported by some ethnoracial
and migrant groups. Although lower levels of reported sexual desire and arousal may reflect less
interest in sex, such group differences may be an artifact of the measures used to quantify desire
and of cultural factors affecting response, such as the desirability of reporting sexual activity by
nonmarried, menopausal, or widowed women. A judgment about whether low sexual desire
reported by a woman from a certain ethnocultural background meets criteria for female sexual
interest/arousal disorder must take into account the fact that different cultural groups may vary in
norms and expectations for sexual behavior.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
By definition, the diagnosis of female sexual interest/arousal disorder is only given to women.
Distressing difficulties with sexual desire in men would be considered under male hypoactive
sexual desire disorder. There are no data showing that rates or expressions of female sexual
interest/arousal disorder differ between heterosexual and lesbian women.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Dysfunctions of sexual arousal and satisfaction have been associated with suicidal thoughts
among female veterans and military service members even after adjustment for probable PTSD,
probable depression, history of deployment, married status, age, service in the army, and race.
Functional Consequences of Female Sexual Interest/Arousal Disorder
Difficulties in sexual interest/arousal are often associated with decreased relationship
satisfaction.
Differential Diagnosis
Nonsexual mental disorders, such as major depressive disorder, in
which there is “markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most of
the day, nearly every day,” may explain the lack of sexual interest/arousal. If the lack of interest
