Substance/medication use.
Another medical condition.
Interpersonal factors.
Other sexual dysfunctions.
Inadequate or absent sexual stimuli.
F52.6
or arousal is completely attributable to another mental disorder, then a diagnosis of female sexual
interest/arousal disorder would not be made.
An onset of difficulties in desire or arousal that coincides with the
beginning of substance/medication use and that dissipates with discontinuation of the
substance/medication or dose reduction is suggestive of a substance/medication-induced sexual
dysfunction, which should be diagnosed instead of female sexual interest/arousal disorder.
If the sexual symptoms are considered to be almost exclusively
associated with the effects of another medical condition (e.g., diabetes mellitus,
493
endothelial disease, thyroid dysfunction, central nervous system disease), then a diagnosis of
female sexual interest/arousal disorder would not be made.
If interpersonal or significant contextual factors, such as severe relationship
distress, intimate partner violence, or other significant stressors, explain the sexual
interest/arousal symptoms, then a diagnosis of female sexual interest/arousal disorder would not
be made.
The presence of another sexual dysfunction does not rule out a
diagnosis of female sexual interest/arousal disorder. It is common for women to experience more
than one sexual dysfunction. For example, the presence of chronic genital pain may lead to a lack
of desire for the (painful) sexual activity. Lack of interest and arousal during sexual activity may
impair orgasmic ability. For some women, all aspects of the sexual response may be unsatisfying
and distressing.
When differential diagnoses are being considered, it is
important to assess the adequacy of sexual stimuli within the woman’s sexual experience. In
cases where inadequate or absent sexual stimuli are contributing to the clinical picture, there may
be evidence for clinical care, but a sexual dysfunction diagnosis would not be made. Similarly,
transient and adaptive alterations in sexual functioning that are secondary to a significant life or
personal event must be considered in the differential diagnosis.
Comorbidity
Comorbidity between sexual interest/arousal problems and other sexual difficulties is extremely
common. Sexual distress and dissatisfaction with sex life are also highly correlated in women
with low sexual desire. Distressing low desire is associated with depression, thyroid problems,
anxiety, urinary incontinence, and other medical factors. Arthritis and inflammatory or irritable
bowel disease are also associated with sexual arousal problems. Low desire appears to be
comorbid with depression, sexual and physical abuse in adulthood, and use of alcohol.
Genito-Pelvic Pain/Penetration Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
