A. Persistent or recurrent difficulties with one (or more) of the following:
1. Vaginal penetration during intercourse.
2. Marked vulvovaginal or pelvic pain during vaginal intercourse or penetration
attempts.
3. Marked fear or anxiety about vulvovaginal or pelvic pain in anticipation of,
during, or as a result of vaginal penetration.
4. Marked tensing or tightening of the pelvic floor muscles during attempted
vaginal penetration.
B. The symptoms in Criterion A have persisted for a minimum duration of
approximately 6 months.
C. The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress in the individual.
D. The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or
as a consequence of a severe relationship distress (e.g., partner violence) or
other significant stressors and is not attributable to the effects of a
substance/medication or another medical condition.
494
Specify whether:
Lifelong: The disturbance has been present since the individual became
sexually active.
Acquired: The disturbance began after a period of relatively normal sexual
function.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Evidence of mild distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
Moderate: Evidence of moderate distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
Severe: Evidence of severe or extreme distress over the symptoms in Criterion
A.
Diagnostic Features
Genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder refers to four commonly comorbid symptom dimensions:
1) difficulty having intercourse, 2) genito-pelvic pain, 3) fear of pain or vaginal penetration, and
4) tension of the pelvic floor muscles (Criterion A). Because major difficulty in any one of these
symptom dimensions is often sufficient to cause clinically significant distress, a diagnosis can be
made on the basis of marked difficulty in only one symptom dimension. However, all four
symptom dimensions should be assessed even if a diagnosis can be made on the basis of only
one symptom dimension.
Marked difficulty having vaginal intercourse/penetration (Criterion A1) can vary from a total
inability to experience vaginal penetration in any situation (e.g., intercourse, gynecological
examinations, tampon insertion) to the ability to easily experience penetration in one situation
but not in another. Although the most common clinical situation is when a female is unable to
