experience intercourse or penetration with a partner, difficulties in undergoing required
gynecological examinations may also be present. Marked vulvovaginal or pelvic pain during
vaginal intercourse or penetration attempts (Criterion A2) refers to pain occurring in different
locations in the genito-pelvic area. Location of pain as well as intensity should be assessed.
Typically, pain can be characterized as superficial (vulvovaginal or occurring during penetration)
or deep (pelvic; i.e., not felt until deeper penetration). The intensity of the pain is often not
linearly related to distress or interference with vaginal penetration or other sexual activities.
Some genito-pelvic pain only occurs when provoked (i.e., by intercourse or mechanical
stimulation); other genito-pelvic pain may be spontaneous as well as provoked. Genito-pelvic
pain can also be usefully characterized qualitatively (e.g., “burning,” “cutting,” “shooting,”
“throbbing”). The pain may persist for a period after intercourse is completed and may also occur
during urination. Typically, the pain experienced during vaginal intercourse can be reproduced
during a gynecological examination.
Marked fear or anxiety about vulvovaginal or pelvic pain either in anticipation of, or during,
or as a result of vaginal penetration (Criterion A3) is commonly reported by females who have
regularly experienced pain during vaginal penetration. This “normal” reaction may lead to
avoidance of sexual/intimate situations. In other cases, this marked fear does not appear to be
closely related to the experience of pain but nonetheless leads to avoidance of intercourse and
vaginal penetration situations. Some have described this as similar to a phobic reaction except
that the phobic object may be vaginal penetration or the fear of pain.
Marked tensing or tightening of the pelvic floor muscles during attempted vaginal
penetration (Criterion A4) can vary from reflexive-like spasm of the pelvic floor in response to
attempted vaginal entry to “normal/voluntary” muscle guarding in response to the anticipated or
the repeated experience of pain or to fear or anxiety. In the case of “normal/guarding” reactions,
penetration may be possible under circumstances of relaxation. The characterization and
assessment of pelvic floor dysfunction is often best undertaken by a specialist gynecologist or by
a pelvic floor physical therapist.
Symptoms of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder may be characterized by previous
terms, including dyspareunia (pain during sexual intercourse) and vaginismus (defined by
495
involuntary contraction of muscles making penetration painful or impossible). Specific
medical disorders, such as vulvodynia (chronic idiopathic vulvar pain lasting at least 3 months)
and provoked vestibulodynia (contact-induced vulvodynia localized to the vulvar vestibule), may
be a primary cause of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder and may be a focus in studies of the
disorder. Females diagnosed with these other conditions report significant distress, and their
symptoms are likely to meet criteria for genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder.
Associated Features
Genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder is frequently associated with other sexual dysfunctions,
particularly reduced sexual desire and interest (female sexual interest/arousal disorder).
Sometimes desire and interest are preserved in sexual situations that are not painful or do not
require penetration. Even when individuals with genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder report
