sexual interest/motivation, there is often behavioral avoidance of sexual situations and
opportunities. Avoidance of gynecological examinations despite medical recommendations is
also frequent. The pattern of avoidance is similar to that seen in phobic disorders. It is common
for females who have not succeeded in having vaginal penetration to come for treatment only
when they wish to conceive. Many females with genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder will
experience associated relationship/marital problems; they also often report that the symptoms
significantly diminish their feelings of femininity.
In addition to the subtype “lifelong/acquired,” five factors should be considered during
assessment and diagnosis of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder because they may be
relevant to etiology or treatment: 1) partner factors (e.g., partner’s sexual problems, partner’s
health status); 2) relationship factors (e.g., partner responses to the pain, including solicitous,
negative, and facilitative responses; discrepancies in desire for sexual activity); 3) individual
vulnerability factors (e.g., poor body image, history of sexual or emotional abuse), psychiatric
comorbidity (e.g., depression, anxiety), or stressors (e.g., job loss, bereavement); 4)
cultural/religious factors (e.g., inhibitions related to prohibitions against sexual activity; attitudes
toward sexuality); and 5) medical factors relevant to prognosis, course, or treatment. Each of
these factors may contribute differently to the presenting symptoms of different females with this
disorder.
Prevalence
The prevalence of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder is unknown. However, approximately
10%–28% of females of reproductive age in the United States report recurrent pain during
intercourse. Difficulties having intercourse appear to be a frequent referral to sexual dysfunction
clinics and to specialist clinicians. Internationally, prevalence of genito-pelvic pain upon
intercourse ranges from 8% to 28% among females of reproductive age and varies by country.
Prevalence of genito-pelvic pain during sexual activities involving vaginal penetration among
lesbian women relative to heterosexual women remains uncertain but may be similar or lower.
Prevalence rates among other sexual minorities, including transgender women, are unknown.
Development and Course
The development and course of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder is unclear. Because
women generally do not seek treatment until they experience problems in sexual functioning, it
can, in general, be difficult to characterize genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder as lifelong
(primary) or acquired (secondary). Although women typically come to clinical attention after the
initiation of sexual activity, there are often earlier clinical signs. For example, difficulty with or
the avoidance of use of tampons is an important predictor of later
496
problems. Difficulties with vaginal penetration (inability or fear or pain) may not be obvious
until intercourse is attempted during sexual activity. Even once intercourse is attempted, the
frequency of attempts may not be significant or regular. In cases where it is difficult to establish
whether symptomatology is lifelong or acquired, it is useful to determine the presence of any
consistent period of successful pain-, fear-, and tension-free intercourse. If the experience of such
