Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
a period can be established, then genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder can be characterized as
acquired. Once symptomatology is present for a period of approximately 6 months, the
probability of spontaneous and significant symptomatic remission appears to diminish.
Complaints related to genito-pelvic pain peak during early adulthood and in the peri- and
postmenopausal period. There may also be an increase in genito-pelvic pain–related symptoms in
the postpartum period.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Females with antecedent mood and anxiety disorders are four times more likely
to develop symptoms of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder compared with those without
these antecedent disorders. Psychosocial factors (e.g., pain catastrophizing, pain self-efficacy,
avoidance of pain, negative mood) and interpersonal factors (e.g., insecure attachment, negative
partner responses to the pain, sexual motives that focus on avoiding negative relationship
outcomes) may exacerbate and maintain symptoms.
Females with genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder are more likely to report a
history of sexual and/or physical abuse, and fear of abuse than females without this disorder,
although not all women with presenting symptoms have this history.
Females experiencing superficial pain during vaginal penetration often
report the onset of the pain after a history of vaginal infections. Even after the infections have
resolved and there are no known residual physical findings, the pain persists. Pain during tampon
insertion or the inability to insert tampons before any sexual contact has been attempted is an
important risk factor for genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder.
Additional biomedical risk factors include early puberty, inflammation, early use of oral
contraceptives, vulvar pain receptor proliferation (i.e., increase in the number of receptors) and
sensitization (i.e., touch may become perceived as pain), and lower touch and pain thresholds.
Abnormalities of the pelvic floor muscles while at rest, including hypertonicity, poor muscle
control, hypersensitivity, and altered contractility, may close the vaginal hiatus and interfere with
penetration.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Cultural contexts can affect the experience and reporting of genito-pelvic pain related to
intercourse. Affected females experience negative implications related to social narratives of
womanhood, sexuality, and femininity, including pressures to prioritize men’s sexual desire and
penetrative sex, and depictions of sex as easy and natural. Cultural views that devalue female
sexual experience may affect the way women interpret the experience of pain during sex, their
help-seeking choices, and how they discuss their symptoms with their caregivers. For example,
some females may not report genito-pelvic pain specifically but rather refer to being unhappy in
their marriages.
In the United States, Hispanic females endorse significantly higher rates of genito-pelvic pain
and are more likely to report pain with first intercourse (i.e., primary genito-pelvic
pain/penetration disorder) compared with non-Hispanic women. In a Minneapolis, Minnesota
survey, only about half of females with genito-pelvic pain sought treatment, and those who did
frequently reported feeling stigmatized. Such experiences may be heightened for
