Another medical condition.
497
sexual minorities and underserved ethnic and racialized groups, especially given evidence of
inequities in pain treatment for females and African Americans.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Gendered social constructions relating to womanhood and femininity are implicated in the
experience of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder, including the prioritization of both
penetrative sex and men’s sexual desires above women’s own needs and desires. The disorder is
associated with feelings of shame and inadequacy as a female, contributing further to enhanced
psychological distress.
By definition, the diagnosis of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder is only given to
females. There is relatively new research concerning urological chronic pelvic pain syndrome in
males, suggesting that males may experience some similar problems. The prevalence of male
genito-pelvic pain is estimated to be 2.2%–9.7% worldwide. The research and clinical experience
are not sufficiently developed yet to justify the application of this diagnosis to males. Other
specified sexual dysfunction or unspecified sexual dysfunction may be diagnosed in males
appearing to fit this pattern.
Diagnostic Markers
Validated physiological measures of Criterion A2 symptoms (Marked vulvovaginal or pelvic
pain during vaginal intercourse or penetration attempts) can be assessed in real time (e.g., the
cotton-swab test, vulvalgesiometer, tampon test). Although these measures are well validated for
pain intensity during penetration attempts, none approximate the sexual context in which the pain
is experienced, which can only be assessed via self-report. Criterion A4 symptoms (Marked
tensing or tightening of the pelvic floor muscles during attempted vaginal penetration) can also
be measured (e.g., via electromyographic amplitude, dynamometer, 4D ultrasound by a qualified
physical therapist). There are no validated physiological measures of component symptoms for
Criterion A1 or A3. Validated psychometric inventories may be used to formally assess the pain
and anxiety components related to genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder.
Functional Consequences of Genito-Pelvic Pain/Penetration Disorder
Functional difficulties in genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder are often associated with
interference in various aspects of the romantic relationship—including the initiation of such
relationships—and sometimes with the ability to conceive via penile/vaginal intercourse.
Differential Diagnosis
In many instances, females with genito-pelvic pain/penetration
disorder will also be diagnosed with another medical condition (e.g., lichen sclerosus,
endometriosis, pelvic inflammatory disease, genitourinary syndrome of menopause). In some
cases, treating the medical condition may alleviate the genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder.
Much of the time, this is not the case. There are no reliable tools or diagnostic methods to allow
clinicians to know whether the medical condition or genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder is
