Somatic symptom and related disorders.
Inadequate sexual stimuli.
F52.0
primary. Often, the associated medical conditions are difficult to diagnose and treat. For
example, the increased incidence of postmenopausal pain during intercourse may sometimes be
attributable to vaginal dryness or irritation associated with declining estrogen levels. The
relationship, however, between genital symptoms, estrogen, and pain is not well understood.
498
Some females with genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder
may also be diagnosable with somatic symptom disorder. Since both genito-pelvic
pain/penetration disorder and the somatic symptom and related disorders are new diagnoses in
DSM-5, it is not yet clear whether they can be reliably differentiated. Some females diagnosed
with genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder will also be diagnosed with a specific phobia.
It is important that the clinician, in considering differential diagnoses,
assess the adequacy of sexual stimuli within the female’s sexual experience. Sexual situations in
which there is inadequate foreplay or arousal may lead to difficulties in penetration, pain, or
avoidance. Erectile dysfunction or premature (early) ejaculation in the male partner may result in
difficulties with penetration. These conditions should be carefully assessed. In some situations, a
diagnosis of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder may not be appropriate.
Comorbidity
Comorbidity between genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder and other sexual difficulties
appears to be common. Comorbidity with relationship distress is also common and typically
related to the lack of sexual intimacy rather than (solely) the pain itself. This is not surprising,
because the inability to have (pain-free) intercourse with a desired partner and the avoidance of
sexual opportunities may be either a contributing factor to or the result of other sexual or
relationship problems. Because pelvic floor symptoms are implicated in the diagnosis of genito-
pelvic pain/penetration disorder, there is likely to be a higher prevalence of other disorders
related to the pelvic floor or reproductive organs (e.g., interstitial cystitis, constipation, vaginal
infection, endometriosis, irritable bowel syndrome). Females with genito-pelvic pain/penetration
disorder frequently experience comorbid chronic pain conditions (e.g., fibromyalgia, chronic
headaches), and the prevalence of these comorbidities increases with the severity of vulvar pain
symptoms.
Lesbian women also report genito-pelvic pain and penetration difficulties during sexual
activities; the frequency of genito-pelvic pain/penetration symptoms among nonheterosexual
women has been shown to be less than or the same as among heterosexual women.
Male Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Persistently or recurrently deficient (or absent) sexual/erotic thoughts or
fantasies and desire for sexual activity. The judgment of deficiency is made by
