the clinician, taking into account factors that affect sexual functioning, such as
age and general and sociocultural contexts of the individual’s life.
B. The symptoms in Criterion A have persisted for a minimum duration of
approximately 6 months.
C. The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress in the individual.
D. The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or
as a consequence of severe relationship distress or other significant stressors
and is not attributable to the effects of a substance/medication or another
medical condition.
Specify whether:
Lifelong: The disturbance has been present since the individual became
sexually active.
Acquired: The disturbance began after a period of relatively normal sexual
function.
499
Specify whether:
Generalized: Not limited to certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
Situational: Only occurs with certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Evidence of mild distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
Moderate: Evidence of moderate distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
Severe: Evidence of severe or extreme distress over the symptoms in Criterion
A.
Diagnostic Features
When an assessment for male hypoactive sexual desire disorder is being made, interpersonal
context must be taken into account. A “desire discrepancy,” in which a man has lower desire for
sexual activity than his partner, is not sufficient to diagnose male hypoactive sexual desire
disorder. Both low/absent desire for sex and deficient/absent sexual thoughts or fantasies
(Criterion A) are required for a diagnosis of the disorder. There may be variation across men in
how sexual desire is expressed.
The lack of desire for sex and deficient/absent erotic thoughts or fantasies must be persistent
or recurrent and must occur for a minimum duration of approximately 6 months. The inclusion of
this duration criterion is meant to safeguard against making a diagnosis in cases in which a man’s
low sexual desire may represent a reactive but temporary response to adverse life conditions. For
example, the man’s low sexual desire may be related to an acute stressor or loss of self-esteem
(e.g., being fired from a job or experiencing financial difficulty such as business failure). If these
stressors persist beyond 6 months along with low sexual desire, then clinician judgment
determines the appropriateness of the male hypoactive sexual desire disorder diagnosis.
