Associated Features
Male hypoactive sexual desire disorder is sometimes associated with erectile and/or ejaculatory
concerns. For example, persistent difficulties obtaining an erection may lead a man to lose
interest in sexual activity. Men with hypoactive sexual desire disorder often report that they no
longer initiate sexual activity and that they are minimally receptive to a partner’s attempt to
initiate. Sexual activities (e.g., masturbation or partnered sexual activity) may sometimes occur
even in the presence of low sexual desire. Relationship-specific preferences regarding patterns of
sexual initiation must be taken into account when making a diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual
desire disorder. Although men are more likely to initiate sexual activity, and thus low desire may
be characterized by a pattern of noninitiation, many men may prefer to have their partner initiate
sexual activity. In such situations, the man’s lack of receptivity to a partner’s initiation should be
considered when evaluating low desire.
In addition to the subtypes “lifelong/acquired” and “generalized/situational,” the following
five factors must be considered during assessment and diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual
desire disorder given that they may be relevant to etiology and/or treatment: 1) partner factors
(e.g., partner’s sexual problems, partner’s health status); 2) relationship factors (e.g., poor
communication, discrepancies in desire for sexual activity); 3) individual vulnerability factors
(e.g., poor body image, history of sexual or emotional abuse), psychiatric comorbidity (e.g.,
depression, anxiety), or stressors (e.g., job loss, bereavement); 4) cultural/religious factors (e.g.,
inhibitions related to prohibitions against sexual activity; attitudes toward sexuality); and 5)
medical factors relevant to prognosis, course, or treatment. Each of these factors may contribute
differently to the presenting symptoms of different men with this disorder.
Prevalence
The prevalence of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder varies depending on country of origin
and method of assessment. Estimates of prevalence in representative samples range
500
from 3% to 17%. Sexual desire problems are less common in younger men (ages 16–24), with
prevalence rates between 3% and 14%, compared with older men (ages 60–74 years), with
prevalence rates between 16% and 28%. However, a persistent lack of interest in sex, lasting 6
months or more, affects a smaller proportion of men (6%). Moreover, less than 2% of men report
clinically significant distress associated with low desire. Studies on help-seeking behavior
indicate that only 10.5% of men with sexual problems in the previous year sought help.
Development and Course
By definition, lifelong male hypoactive sexual desire disorder indicates that low or no sexual
desire has always been present, whereas the acquired subtype would be assigned if the man’s low
desire developed after a period of normal sexual desire. There is a requirement that low desire
persist for approximately 6 months or more; thus, short-term changes in sexual desire should not
be diagnosed as male hypoactive sexual desire disorder.
There is a normative age-related decline in sexual desire. The prevalence of low sexual desire
in men increases with age, from approximately 5.2% prevalence at age 27 years to 18.5% at age
