Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
50 years. Like women, men identify a variety of triggers for their sexual desire, and they
describe a wide range of reasons that they choose to engage in sexual activity. Although erotic
visual cues may be more potent elicitors of desire in younger men, the potency of sexual cues
may decrease with age and must be considered when evaluating men for hypoactive sexual
desire disorder.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Mood and anxiety symptoms appear to be strong predictors of low desire in men.
Up to half of men with a past history of psychiatric symptoms may have moderate or severe loss
of desire, compared with only 15% of those without such a history. A man’s feelings about
himself, his perception of his partner’s sexual desire toward him, feelings of being emotionally
connected, and contextual variables may all negatively (as well as positively) affect sexual
desire.
Beliefs about sexuality (particularly restrictive sexual attitudes and conservative beliefs) are
commonly associated with low sexual desire in men. Moreover, lack of erotic thoughts and
concerns about erection during sexual activity are significant predictors of low sexual desire, as
well as low confidence levels in erectile function.
Alcohol use may increase the occurrence of low desire. Other environmental
determinants of low sexual desire include problematic dyadic relationships, reduced attraction
toward the partner, living in a long-term relationship, sexual boredom, and professional stress. At
the larger societal level, cohort studies in a few high-income countries indicate a trend toward the
decrease of sexual desire in men in recent decades.
Endocrine disorders such as hyperprolactinemia and hypogonadism
significantly affect sexual desire in men. Age is a significant risk factor for low desire in men. It
is unclear whether or not men with low desire also have abnormally low levels of testosterone;
however, among hypogonadal men, low desire is common. There also may be a critical threshold
below which testosterone will affect sexual desire in men and above which there is little effect of
testosterone on men’s desire.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
There is marked variability in prevalence rates of low desire across world regions, ranging from
12.5% in Northern European men to 28% in Southeast Asian men ages 40–80 years. Distress
about lack of sexual desire was significantly associated with sociocultural contexts (e.g.,
occupational stress) in a web-based survey across three European countries (Portugal, Croatia,
and Norway).
501
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
In contrast to the classification of sexual dysfunctions in women, desire and arousal disorders
have been retained as separate constructs in men. Despite some similarities in the experience of
desire across men and women, and the fact that desire fluctuates over time and is dependent on
contextual factors, men do report a significantly higher intensity and frequency of sexual desire
