Nonsexual mental disorders.
Substance/medication use.
Another medical condition.
Interpersonal factors.
Other sexual dysfunctions.
F52.4
compared with women. However, preliminary data suggest that the overlap between sexual
desire and sexual arousal (erectile function) is also very common in men, particularly when they
present for help regarding sexual problems. Regarding sexual orientation, data suggest that low
sexual desire is more commonly reported by gay men (19%) than by heterosexual men (9%).
Differential Diagnosis
Nonsexual mental disorders, such as major depressive disorder,
which is characterized by “markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all,
activities,” may explain the lack of sexual desire. If the lack of desire is better explained by
another mental disorder, then a diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder would not be
made.
An onset of male hypoactive sexual desire that coincides with the
beginning of substance/medication use and that dissipates with discontinuation of the
substance/medication or dose reduction is suggestive of a substance/medication-induced sexual
dysfunction, which should be diagnosed instead of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder.
If the low/absent desire and deficient/absent erotic thoughts or
fantasies are better explained by the effects of another medical condition (e.g., hypogonadism,
diabetes mellitus, thyroid dysfunction, central nervous system disease), then a diagnosis of male
hypoactive sexual desire disorder would not be made.
If interpersonal or significant contextual factors, such as severe relationship
distress or other significant stressors, are associated with the loss of desire in the man, then a
diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder would not be made.
The presence of another sexual dysfunction does not rule out a
diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder; there is some evidence that up to one-half of
men with low sexual desire also have erectile difficulties, and slightly fewer may also have early
ejaculation difficulties. If the man’s low desire is explained by self-identification as an asexual,
then a diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder is not made.
Comorbidity
Male hypoactive sexual desire disorder is rarely the sole sexual diagnosis in men. Erectile
dysfunction, delayed ejaculation, and premature (early) ejaculation are often comorbid
diagnoses. Depression and other mental disorders, as well as endocrinological factors, are often
comorbid with male hypoactive sexual desire disorder.
Premature (Early) Ejaculation
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A persistent or recurrent pattern of ejaculation occurring during partnered sexual
activity within approximately 1 minute following vaginal penetration and before
the individual wishes it.
