502
Note: Although the diagnosis of premature (early) ejaculation may be applied to
individuals engaged in nonvaginal sexual activities, specific duration criteria have
not been established for these activities.
B. The symptom in Criterion A must have been present for at least 6 months and
must be experienced on almost all or all (approximately 75%–100%) occasions
of sexual activity (in identified situational contexts or, if generalized, in all
contexts).
C. The symptom in Criterion A causes clinically significant distress in the individual.
D. The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or
as a consequence of severe relationship distress or other significant stressors
and is not attributable to the effects of a substance/medication or another
medical condition.
Specify whether:
Lifelong: The disturbance has been present since the individual became
sexually active.
Acquired: The disturbance began after a period of relatively normal sexual
function.
Specify whether:
Generalized: Not limited to certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
Situational: Only occurs with certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Ejaculation occurring within approximately 30 seconds to 1 minute of
vaginal penetration.
Moderate: Ejaculation occurring within approximately 15–30 seconds of vaginal
penetration.
Severe: Ejaculation occurring prior to sexual activity, at the start of sexual
activity, or within approximately 15 seconds of vaginal penetration.
Diagnostic Features
Premature (early) ejaculation is manifested by ejaculation that occurs prior to or shortly after
vaginal penetration, operationalized by an individual’s estimate of ejaculatory latency (i.e.,
elapsed time before ejaculation) after vaginal penetration. Although the diagnostic criteria
specify penile-vaginal sex, it is reasonable to assume that similar estimates of ejaculatory latency
apply to males having sex with males, as well as to other sexual behaviors. Estimated and
measured intravaginal ejaculatory latencies are highly correlated as long as the ejaculatory
latency is of short duration; therefore, self-reported estimates of ejaculatory latency are sufficient
for diagnostic purposes. A 60-second intravaginal ejaculatory latency time was previously
considered to be an appropriate cutoff for the diagnosis of lifelong premature (early) ejaculation
in men; however, expert consensus now considers this latency time to be too brief and instead
