Temperamental.
Genetic and physiological.
recommends a 120-second threshold.
Associated Features
Many males with premature (early) ejaculation complain of a sense of lack of control over
ejaculation and report apprehension about their anticipated inability to delay ejaculation on
future sexual encounters.
The following factors may be relevant in the evaluation of any sexual dysfunction: 1) partner
factors (e.g., partner’s sexual problems, partner’s health status); 2) relationship factors (e.g., poor
communication, discrepancies in desire for sexual activity); 3) individual vulnerability factors
(e.g., history of sexual or emotional abuse), psychiatric comorbidity (e.g., depression, anxiety),
and stressors (e.g., job loss, bereavement); 4) cultural/religious factors (e.g., lack of privacy,
inhibitions related to prohibitions against sexual activity; attitudes toward sexuality); and 5)
medical factors relevant to prognosis, course, or treatment.
503
Prevalence
Estimates of the prevalence of premature (early) ejaculation vary widely depending on the
definition utilized. Internationally, a prevalence range of 8%–30% has been reported across all
ages, with even lower and higher rates in other studies. Prevalence of premature (early)
ejaculation may increase with age. For example, the prevalence among males ages 18–30 in
Switzerland and Turkey is about 9%–11%, while the reported prevalence of concern among
males ages 50–59 in the United States about how rapidly they ejaculate may be as high as 55%.
When premature (early) ejaculation is defined as ejaculation occurring within approximately 1
minute of vaginal penetration, only 1%–3% of males would be diagnosed with the disorder.
Development and Course
By definition, lifelong premature (early) ejaculation starts during a male’s initial sexual
experiences and persists thereafter. Some males may experience premature (early) ejaculation
during their initial sexual encounters but gain ejaculatory control over time. It is the persistence
of ejaculatory problems for longer than 6 months that determines the diagnosis of premature
(early) ejaculation. In contrast, some males develop the disorder after a period of having a
normal ejaculatory latency, known as acquired premature (early) ejaculation. There is far less
known about acquired premature (early) ejaculation than about lifelong premature (early)
ejaculation. The acquired form likely has a later onset, usually appearing during or after the
fourth decade of life. Lifelong is relatively stable throughout life.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Premature (early) ejaculation may be more common in males with anxiety
disorders, especially social anxiety disorder.
There is a moderate genetic contribution to lifelong premature (early)
ejaculation. Premature (early) ejaculation may be associated with dopamine transporter gene
polymorphism or serotonin transporter gene polymorphism. Thyroid disease, prostatitis, and
