Substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction.
drug withdrawal are associated with acquired premature (early) ejaculation. Positron emission
tomography measures of regional cerebral blood flow during ejaculation have shown primary
activation in the mesocephalic transition zone, including the ventral tegmental area.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Perception of what constitutes a normal ejaculatory latency differs cross-culturally and may be
related to varying awareness of sexual dysfunction, concern about sexual failure, and perceptions
about the importance of sex. Measured ejaculatory latencies may differ in some countries.
Cultural or religious factors may contribute to these differences. For example, reports of
premature (early) ejaculation were more common in arranged marriages, because of factors such
as anxiety over family pressures and lack of premarital sexual experience.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Premature (early) ejaculation is a sexual dysfunction in men. Men and their sexual partners may
differ in their perception of what constitutes an acceptable ejaculatory latency. There may be
increasing concerns in women about early ejaculation in their sexual partners, which may be a
reflection of changing societal attitudes concerning women’s sexual activity.
504
Diagnostic Markers
Ejaculatory latency is usually monitored in research settings by the sexual partner utilizing a
timing device (e.g., stopwatch), though this is not ideal in real-life sexual situations. In clinical
settings, the man’s estimate of the time between intravaginal penetration and ejaculation should
be accepted in lieu of stopwatch measurements.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Among males receiving treatment for premature (early) ejaculation with comorbid depression,
elevated rates of suicidal thoughts or behavior have been observed; although the affected males
attributed the suicidal symptoms to their premature (early) ejaculation, the presence of
depression was also a likely contributing factor.
Functional Consequences of Premature (Early) Ejaculation
A pattern of premature (early) ejaculation may be associated with decreased self-esteem and self-
confidence, a sense of lack of control, and adverse consequences for partner relationships. It may
also cause personal distress and decreased sexual satisfaction in the sexual partner. Single males
are more bothered than partnered males by premature (early) ejaculation because of its
interference with seeking and maintaining new relationships. Ejaculation prior to penetration
may be associated with difficulties in conception.
Differential Diagnosis
When 
problems 
with 
premature 
(early)
ejaculation are attributable exclusively to substance use, intoxication, or withdrawal,
