Ejaculatory concerns that do not meet diagnostic criteria.
substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction should be diagnosed.
It is necessary to identify males with normal
ejaculatory latencies who desire longer ejaculatory latencies and males who have episodic
premature (early) ejaculation (e.g., during the first sexual encounter with a new partner when a
short ejaculatory latency may be common or normative). Neither of these situations would lead
to a diagnosis of premature (early) ejaculation, even though these situations may be distressing to
some males.
Comorbidity
Premature (early) ejaculation may be associated with erectile problems. In many cases, it may be
difficult to determine which difficulty preceded the other. Lifelong premature (early) ejaculation
may be associated with certain anxiety disorders. Acquired premature (early) ejaculation may be
associated with prostatitis, thyroid disease, or drug withdrawal (e.g., during opioid withdrawal).
Substance/Medication-Induced Sexual Dysfunction
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A clinically significant disturbance in sexual function is predominant in the clinical
picture.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
of both (1) and (2):
505
1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance
intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a
medication.
2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in
Criterion A.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by a sexual dysfunction that is not
substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent sexual
dysfunction could include the following:
The symptoms precede the onset of the substance/medication use; the
symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after
the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other
evidence 
suggesting 
the 
existence 
of 
an 
independent 
non-
substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction (e.g., a history of recurrent
non-substance/medication-related episodes).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress in the individual.
