Specify current severity:
Mild: Occurs on 25%–50% of occasions of sexual activity.
Moderate: Occurs on 50%–75% of occasions of sexual activity.
Severe: Occurs on 75% or more of occasions of sexual activity.
Recording Procedures
The name of the substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction begins with the specific
substance (e.g., alcohol) that is presumed to be causing the sexual dysfunction. The ICD-10-CM
code that corresponds to the applicable drug class is selected from the table included in the
criteria set. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., fluoxetine), the ICD-10-
CM code for the other (or unknown) substance class should be used and the name of the specific
substance recorded (e.g., F19.981 fluoxetine-induced sexual dysfunction). In cases in which a
substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific substance is unknown, the ICD-10-
CM code for the other (or unknown) substance class is used and the fact that the substance is
unknown is recorded (e.g., F19.981 unknown substance-induced sexual dysfunction).
When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is
listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance-induced sexual
dysfunction, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication, onset during
withdrawal, with onset after medication use), followed by the severity specifier (e.g., mild,
moderate, severe). For example, in the case of erectile dysfunction occurring during intoxication
in a man with a severe alcohol use disorder, the diagnosis is F10.281 severe alcohol use disorder
with alcohol-induced sexual dysfunction, with onset during intoxication, moderate. A separate
diagnosis of the comorbid severe alcohol use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced
sexual dysfunction occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time
heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F15.981
amphetamine-induced sexual dysfunction, with onset during intoxication). When more than one
substance is judged to play a significant role in the development of the sexual dysfunction, each
should be listed separately (e.g., F14.181 mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced sexual
dysfunction, with onset during intoxication, moderate; F19.981 fluoxetine-induced sexual
dysfunction, with onset after medication use, moderate).
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction are clinically
significant disturbances in sexual function that are predominant in the clinical picture (Criterion
A) that are judged to be due to the effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse or medication).
The sexual dysfunction must have developed during or soon after substance intoxication or
withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a medication, and the substances or
medications must be capable of producing the symptoms (Criterion B2). Substance/medication-
induced sexual dysfunction due to a prescribed treatment for a
507
mental disorder or another medical condition must have its onset while the individual is
