receiving the medication (or during withdrawal, if a withdrawal is associated with the
medication). Once the treatment is discontinued, the sexual dysfunction will usually improve or
remit within days to several weeks (depending on the half-life of the substance/medication and
the presence of withdrawal). The diagnosis of substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction
should not be given if the onset of the sexual dysfunction precedes the substance/medication
intoxication or withdrawal, or if the symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (i.e.,
usually longer than 1 month) from the time of severe intoxication or withdrawal.
Associated Features
Sexual dysfunctions can occur in association with intoxication with the following classes of
substances: alcohol; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics; stimulants (including cocaine);
and other (or unknown) substances. Sexual dysfunctions can occur in association with
withdrawal from the following classes of substances: alcohol; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or
anxiolytics; and other (or unknown) substances. Medications that can induce sexual dysfunctions
include antidepressants, antipsychotics, and hormonal contraceptives.
The most commonly reported side effect of antidepressant drugs is difficulty with orgasm or
ejaculation in men, and with arousal in women. Problems with desire and erection are less
frequent. There is evidence that the effects of antidepressant medications on sexual dysfunction
occur regardless of levels of depression. Approximately 30% of sexual complaints are clinically
significant. Certain agents (i.e., bupropion, mirtazapine, nefazodone, and vilazodone) appear to
have lower rates of sexual side effects than other antidepressants.
The sexual problems associated with antipsychotic drugs, including problems with sexual
desire, erection, lubrication, ejaculation, or orgasm, have occurred with typical as well as
atypical agents. However, problems are less common with prolactin-sparing antipsychotics or
those that do not block dopamine receptors.
Although the effects of mood stabilizers on sexual function are unclear, it is possible that
lithium and anticonvulsants, with the possible exception of lamotrigine, have adverse effects on
sexual desire. Problems with orgasm may occur with gabapentin. Similarly, there may be a
higher prevalence of erectile and orgasm problems associated with benzodiazepines. There have
not been such reports with buspirone.
Many nonpsychiatric medications, such as cardiovascular, cytotoxic, gastrointestinal, and
hormonal agents, are associated with disturbances in sexual function. Use of 5-α-reductase
inhibitors (e.g., dutasteride, finasteride) may reduce erectile function, ejaculatory function, and
libido in men.
Illicit substance use is associated with decreased sexual desire, erectile dysfunction, and
difficulty reaching orgasm. Sexual dysfunctions are also seen in individuals receiving methadone
but are seldom reported by individuals receiving buprenorphine. Chronic nicotine or chronic
alcohol abuse are associated with erectile problems. Cannabis, like alcohol, is a central nervous
system depressant, and its use may be a risk factor for sexual dysfunction; however, it has also
been suggested to potentially improve satisfaction with orgasm.
Prevalence
The prevalence and the incidence of substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction are
unclear, likely because of underreporting of treatment-emergent sexual side effects. Data on
