substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction typically concern the effects of antidepressant
drugs. The prevalence of antidepressant-induced sexual dysfunction varies in part depending on
the specific agent. Approximately 25%–80% of individuals taking monoamine oxidase
inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, serotonergic antidepressants, and combined serotonergic-
adrenergic antidepressants report sexual side effects. There
508
are differences in the incidence of sexual side effects between some serotonergic and combined
adrenergic-serotonergic antidepressants, with medications such as citalopram, fluoxetine,
fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline, and venlafaxine having the highest rates of sexual
dysfunction.
Approximately 50% of individuals taking antipsychotic medications will experience adverse
sexual side effects, including problems with sexual desire, erection, lubrication, ejaculation, or
orgasm. The incidence of these side effects among different antipsychotic agents is unclear.
Exact prevalence and incidence of sexual dysfunctions among users of nonpsychiatric
medications such as cardiovascular, cytotoxic, gastrointestinal, and hormonal agents are
unknown. Elevated rates of sexual dysfunction have been reported high-dose opioid drugs for
pain. There are increased rates of decreased sexual desire, erectile dysfunction, and difficulty
reaching orgasm associated with illicit substance use. The prevalence of sexual problems appears
related to chronic drug abuse and appears higher in individuals who abuse heroin (approximately
60%–70%) than in individuals who abuse amphetamine-type substances or 3,4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine (i.e., MDMA, ecstasy). Elevated rates of sexual dysfunction
are also seen in individuals receiving methadone but are seldom reported by individuals
receiving buprenorphine. Chronic alcohol abuse and chronic nicotine abuse are related to higher
rates of erectile problems.
Development and Course
The onset of antidepressant-induced sexual dysfunction may be as early as 8 days after the agent
is first taken. Approximately 30% of individuals with mild to moderate orgasm delay will
experience spontaneous remission of the dysfunction within 6 months. In some cases, serotonin
reuptake inhibitor–induced sexual dysfunction may persist after the agent is discontinued. The
time to onset of sexual dysfunction after initiation of antipsychotic drugs or drugs of abuse is
unknown. It is probable that the adverse effects of nicotine and alcohol may not appear until after
years of use. Premature (early) ejaculation can sometimes occur after cessation of opioid use.
There is some evidence that disturbances in sexual function related to substance/medication use
increase with age.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
There may be an interaction among cultural factors, the influence of medications on sexual
functioning, and the response of the individual to those changes.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Some gender differences in sexual side effects from substances and medications may exist, such
