Non-substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunctions.
that men may more often report impairments with desire and orgasm following antidepressant
use, and women may more often report difficulties with sexual arousal.
Functional Consequences of Substance/Medication-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction
Medication-induced sexual dysfunction may result in medication noncompliance, such as
stopping medications or using them irregularly, which could contribute to the lack of efficacy for
antidepressants.
Differential Diagnosis
Many mental disorders, such as depressive,
bipolar, anxiety, and psychotic disorders, are associated with disturbances of sexual function.
Thus, differentiating a substance/medication-induced sexual
509
dysfunction from a manifestation of the underlying mental disorder can be quite difficult. The
diagnosis is usually established if a close relationship between substance/medication initiation or
discontinuation is observed. A clear diagnosis can be established if the problem occurs after
substance/medication initiation, dissipates with substance/medication discontinuation, and recurs
with introduction of the same agent. Most substance/medication-induced side effects occur
shortly after initiation or discontinuation. Sexual side effects that only occur after chronic use of
a substance/medication may be extremely difficult to diagnose with certainty.
Other Specified Sexual Dysfunction
F52.8
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a sexual
dysfunction that cause clinically significant distress in the individual predominate but
do not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the sexual dysfunctions
diagnostic class. The other specified sexual dysfunction category is used in
situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate the specific reason that the
presentation does not meet the criteria for any specific sexual dysfunction. This is
done by recording “other specified sexual dysfunction” followed by the specific
reason (e.g., “sexual aversion”).
Unspecified Sexual Dysfunction
F52.9
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a sexual
