Gender Dysphoria
In this chapter, there is one overarching diagnosis of gender dysphoria, with separate
developmentally appropriate criteria sets for children and for adolescents and adults. The area of
sex and gender is highly controversial and has led to a proliferation of terms whose meanings
vary over time and within and between disciplines. An additional source of confusion is that in
English “sex” connotes both male/female and sexuality. This chapter employs constructs and
terms as they are widely used by clinicians from various disciplines with specialization in
treating gender dysphoria. In this chapter, sex and sexual refer to the biological indicators of
male and female (understood in the context of reproductive capacity), such as in sex
chromosomes, gonads, sex hormones, and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia.
Disorders of sex development or differences of sex development (DSDs) included the historical
terms hermaphroditism and pseudohermaphroditism. DSDs include somatic intersex conditions
such as congenital development of ambiguous genitalia (e.g., clitoromegaly, micropenis),
congenital disjunction of internal and external sex anatomy (e.g., complete androgen insensitivity
syndrome), incomplete development of sex anatomy (e.g., gonadal agenesis), sex chromosome
anomalies (e.g., Turner syndrome; Klinefelter syndrome), or disorders of gonadal development
(e.g., ovotestes).
Gender is used to denote the public, sociocultural (and usually legally recognized) lived role
as boy or girl, man or woman, or other gender. Biological factors are seen as contributing, in
interaction with social and psychological factors, to gender development. Gender assignment
refers to the assignment as male or female. This occurs usually at birth based on phenotypic sex
and, thereby, yields the birth-assigned gender, historically referred to as “biological sex” or,
more recently, “natal gender.” Birth-assigned sex is often used interchangeably with birth-
assigned gender. The terms assigned sex and assigned gender encompass birth-assigned
sex/gender but also include gender/sex assignments and reassignments made after birth but
during infancy or early childhood, usually in the case of intersex conditions. Gender-atypical
refers to somatic features or behaviors that are not typical (in a statistical sense) of individuals
with the same assigned gender in a given society and historical era; gender-nonconforming,
gender variant, and gender diverse are alternative nondiagnostic terms. Gender reassignment
denotes an official (and sometimes legal) change of gender. Gender-affirming treatments are
medical procedures (hormones or surgeries or both) that aim to align an individual’s physical
characteristics with their experienced gender. Gender identity is a category of social identity and
refers to an individual’s identification as male, female, some category in between (i.e., gender
fluid), or a category other than male or female (i.e., gender neutral). There has been a
proliferation of gender identities in recent years. Gender dysphoria as a general descriptive term
refers to the distress that may accompany the incongruence between one’s experienced or
expressed gender and one’s assigned gender. However, it is more specifically defined when used
as a diagnostic category. It does not refer to distress related to stigma, a distinct although
