F64.2
possibly co-occurring source of distress. Transgender refers to the broad spectrum of individuals
whose gender identity is different from their birth-assigned gender. Cisgender describes
individuals whose gender expression is congruent with their birth-assigned gender (also
nontransgender). Transsexual, a historic term, denotes an individual who seeks, is undergoing,
512
or has undergone a social transition from male to female or female to male, which in many,
but not all, cases also involves a somatic transition by gender-affirming hormone treatment and
genital, breast, or other gender-affirming surgery (historically referred to as sex reassignment
surgery).
Although not all individuals will experience distress from incongruence, many are distressed
if the desired physical interventions using hormones and/or surgery are not available. The current
term is more descriptive than the previous DSM-IV term gender identity disorder and focuses on
dysphoria as the clinical problem, not identity per se.
Gender Dysphoria
Diagnostic Criteria
Gender Dysphoria in Children
A. A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/expressed gender and
assigned gender, of at least 6 months’ duration, as manifested by at least six of
the following (one of which must be Criterion A1):
1. A strong desire to be of the other gender or an insistence that one is the other
gender (or some alternative gender different from one’s assigned gender).
2. In boys (assigned gender), a strong preference for cross-dressing or
simulating female attire; or in girls (assigned gender), a strong preference for
wearing only typical masculine clothing and a strong resistance to the
wearing of typical feminine clothing.
3. A strong preference for cross-gender roles in make-believe play or fantasy
play.
4. A strong preference for the toys, games, or activities stereotypically used or
engaged in by the other gender.
5. A strong preference for playmates of the other gender.
6. In boys (assigned gender), a strong rejection of typically masculine toys,
games, and activities and a strong avoidance of rough-and-tumble play; or in
girls (assigned gender), a strong rejection of typically feminine toys, games,
and activities.
7. A strong dislike of one’s sexual anatomy.
8. A strong desire for the primary and/or secondary sex characteristics that
