F64.0
match one’s experienced gender.
B. The condition is associated with clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, school, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
With a disorder/difference of sex development (e.g., a congenital
adrenogenital disorder such as E25.0 congenital adrenal hyperplasia or E34.50
androgen insensitivity syndrome).
Coding note: Code the disorder/difference of sex development as well as
gender dysphoria.
Gender Dysphoria in Adolescents and Adults
A. A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/expressed gender
and assigned gender, of at least 6 months’ duration, as manifested by at least
two of the following:
1. A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/expressed gender and
primary and/or secondary sex characteristics (or in young adolescents, the
anticipated secondary sex characteristics).
513
2. A strong desire to be rid of one’s primary and/or secondary sex
characteristics 
because 
of 
a 
marked 
incongruence 
with 
one’s
experienced/expressed gender (or in young adolescents, a desire to prevent
the development of the anticipated secondary sex characteristics).
3. A strong desire for the primary and/or secondary sex characteristics of the
other gender.
4. A strong desire to be of the other gender (or some alternative gender different
from one’s assigned gender).
5. A strong desire to be treated as the other gender (or some alternative gender
different from one’s assigned gender).
6. A strong conviction that one has the typical feelings and reactions of the other
gender (or some alternative gender different from one’s assigned gender).
B. The condition is associated with clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
With a disorder/difference of sex development (e.g., a congenital
adrenogenital disorder such as E25.0 congenital adrenal hyperplasia or E34.50
androgen insensitivity syndrome).
Coding note: Code the disorder/difference of sex development as well as
gender dysphoria.
Specify if:
