Posttransition: The individual has transitioned to full-time living in the
experienced gender (with or without legalization of gender change) and has
undergone (or is preparing to have) at least one gender-affirming medical
procedure or treatment regimen—namely, regular gender-affirming hormone
treatment or gender reassignment surgery confirming the experienced gender
(e.g., breast augmentation surgery and/or vulvovaginoplasty in an individual
assigned male at birth; transmasculine chest surgery and/or phalloplasty or
metoidioplasty in an individual assigned female at birth).
Specifiers
The specifier “with a disorder/difference of sex development” should be used in the context of
individuals who have a specific and codable disorder/difference of sex development documented
in their medical record.
The “posttransition” specifier may be used in the context of continuing treatment procedures
that serve to support the new gender assignment.
Diagnostic Features
Individuals with gender dysphoria have a marked incongruence between the gender to which
they have been assigned (usually based on phenotypic sex at birth, referred to as birth-assigned
gender) and their experienced/expressed gender. This discrepancy is the core component of the
diagnosis. There must also be evidence of distress about this incongruence. Experienced gender
may include alternative gender identities beyond binary stereotypes. Consequently, distress may
involve not only the experience that the individual is a male or female gender other than the one
assigned at birth but also an experience that the individual is an intermediate or alternative
gender that differs from the individual’s birth-assigned gender.
Gender dysphoria manifests itself differently in different age groups. The following examples
may be less prominent in children raised in surroundings with fewer gender stereotypes.
Prepubertal individuals assigned female at birth with gender dysphoria may express a
marked, persistent feeling or conviction that they are a boy, express aversion to the idea of
514
being a girl, or assert they will grow up to be a man. They often prefer boys’ clothing and
hairstyles, may be perceived by strangers as boys, and may ask to be called by a boy’s name.
Sometimes they display intense negative reactions to parental attempts to have them wear dresses
or other feminine attire. Some may refuse to attend school or social events where such clothes
are required. These children may demonstrate marked gender nonconformity in role-playing,
dreams, gender-typed play and toy preferences, styles, mannerisms, fantasies, and peer
preferences. Contact sports, rough-and-tumble play, traditional boyhood games, and boys as
playmates are most often preferred. They show little interest in stereotypically feminine toys
(e.g., dolls) or activities (e.g., feminine dress-up or role-play). Occasionally, they refuse to
urinate in a sitting position. Some may express a desire to have a penis or claim to have a penis
or that they will grow one when older. They may also state that they do not want to develop
