breasts or menstruate.
Prepubertal individuals assigned male at birth with gender dysphoria may express a marked,
persistent feeling or conviction that they are a girl or assert that they will grow up to be a woman.
They may express aversion to the idea of being a boy. They often prefer dressing in girls’ or
women’s clothes or may improvise clothing from available materials (e.g., using towels, aprons,
and scarves for long hair or skirts). These children may demonstrate marked gender
nonconformity in gender-typed play and toy preferences, styles, mannerisms, and peer
preferences. They may role-play female figures (e.g., playing “mother”) and may be intensely
interested in female fantasy figures. Traditional feminine activities, stereotypical games, and
pastimes (e.g., “playing house”; drawing feminine pictures; watching television or videos of
favorite female characters) may be preferred. Stereotypical female-type dolls (e.g., Barbie) may
be favorite toys, and girls are their preferred playmates. They avoid rough-and-tumble play and
have little interest in stereotypically masculine toys (e.g., cars, trucks). They may state that they
find their penis or testes disgusting, that they wish them removed, or that they have, or wish to
have, a vagina.
Increasingly, parents are presenting to specialized clinics after their child with gender
dysphoria has already socially transitioned.
As the onset of puberty for individuals assigned female at birth is somewhere between ages 9
and 13, and between 11 and 14 for individuals assigned male at birth, their symptoms and
concerns may arise in a developmental phase somewhere between childhood and adolescence.
As secondary sex characteristics of younger adolescents are not yet fully developed, these
individuals may not state dislike of them, but they may be markedly distressed by imminent
physical changes.
In adolescents and adults with gender dysphoria, the discrepancy between experienced
gender and physical sex characteristics is often, but not always, accompanied by a desire to be
rid of primary and/or secondary sex characteristics and/or a strong desire to acquire some
primary and/or secondary sex characteristics of another gender. To varying degrees, older
adolescents and adults with gender dysphoria may adopt the behavior, clothing, and mannerisms
of their experienced gender. They feel uncomfortable being regarded by others, or functioning in
society, as members of their assigned gender. Some adults and adolescents may have a strong
desire to be of a different gender and treated as such, and they may have an inner certainty to feel
and respond as their experienced gender without seeking medical treatment to alter body
characteristics. They may find other ways to resolve the incongruence between
experienced/expressed and assigned gender by partially living in the desired role or by adopting
a gender role neither conventionally male nor conventionally female.
Associated Features
When visible signs of puberty develop, individuals assigned male at birth may shave their facial,
body, and leg hair at the first signs of growth. They sometimes bind their genitals to make
erections less visible. Individuals assigned female at birth may bind their breasts,
515
walk with a stoop, or use loose sweaters to make breasts less visible. Increasingly, adolescents
