request, or may obtain without medical prescription and supervision, drugs that suppress
production of gonadal steroids (e.g., gonadotropin-releasing hormone [GnRH] agonists) or that
block gonadal hormone actions (e.g., spironolactone). Clinically referred adolescents often want
hormone treatment and many also wish for gender-affirming surgery. Adolescents living in an
accepting environment may openly express the desire to be and be treated as their experienced
gender and dress partly or completely as their experienced gender, have a hairstyle typical of
their experienced gender, preferentially seek friendships with peers of another gender, and/or
adopt a new first name consistent with their experienced gender. Older adolescents, when
sexually active, often do not show or allow partners to touch their sexual organs. For adults with
an aversion toward their genitals, sexual activity is constrained by the preference that their
genitals not be seen or touched by their partners. Not infrequently, adults may seek hormone
treatment (sometimes without medical prescription and supervision) and gender-affirming
surgery. Others are satisfied with either hormone treatment or surgery alone, or without any
gender-affirming medical treatment.
In children, adolescents, and adults with gender dysphoria, an overrepresentation of autism
spectrum traits has been observed. Also, individuals with autism spectrum disorder are more
likely to exhibit gender diversity.
Adolescents and adults with gender dysphoria before gender-affirming treatment and legal
gender change are at increased risk for mental health problems including suicidal ideation,
suicide attempts, and suicides. After gender reassignment, adjustment may vary, and suicide risk
and mental health problems may persist.
In prepubertal children, increasing age is associated with having more behavioral or
emotional problems; this is related to the increasing nonacceptance of gender-nonconforming
behavior by others. Children and adolescents who feel supported and accepted in their gender
nonconformity may show less or even no psychological problems.
Prevalence
There are no large-scale population studies of gender dysphoria. Based on gender-affirming
treatment–seeking populations, the prevalence for gender dysphoria diagnosis across populations
has been assessed to be less than 1/1,000 (i.e., < 0.1%) for both individuals assigned male at birth
and individuals assigned female at birth. Because many adults with gender dysphoria do not seek
care at specialty treatment programs, prevalence rates are likely underestimates. Prevalence
estimates based on surveys of self-reporting general population samples in the United States and
Europe suggest higher numbers, although varied methods of assessment make comparisons
difficult across studies. Self-identification as transgender ranges from 0.5% to 0.6%;
experiencing oneself as having an incongruent gender identity ranges from 0.6% to 1.1%; feeling
that one is a person of a different sex ranges from 2.1% to 2.6%; and the desire to undergo
medical treatment ranges from 0.2% to 0.6%.
Development and Course
Because expression of gender dysphoria varies with age, there are separate criteria sets for
children versus those for adolescents and adults. Criteria for children are defined in a more
concrete, behavioral manner than those for adolescents and adults. Young children are less likely
than older children, adolescents, and adults to express extreme and persistent anatomic
