Gender dysphoria without a disorder of sex development.
dysphoria. In adolescents and adults, incongruence between experienced gender and assigned
gender is a central feature of the diagnosis. Factors related to distress and impairment also vary
with age. A very young child may show signs of distress (e.g., intense crying) only when parents
tell the child that he or she is “really” not a member of another gender but only “desires” to be.
Distress may not be manifest in social environments supportive of the child’s gender
nonconformity and may emerge only if there is
516
parental/social interference with the child’s gender variance. In adolescents and adults, distress
may manifest because of strong incongruence between experienced gender and birth-assigned
gender. Such distress may, however, be mitigated by supportive environments and knowledge
that biomedical treatments exist to reduce incongruence. Impairment (e.g., school refusal,
development of depression, anxiety, peer and behavioral problems, and substance abuse) may be
a correlate of gender dysphoria.
For clinic-referred children studied in
Canada and the Netherlands, onset of gender-nonconforming behaviors is usually between ages 2
and 4 years. This corresponds to the developmental time period in which most children begin
expressing gendered behaviors and interests. For some preschool-age children, both marked,
persistent gender-atypical behaviors and the expressed desire to be another gender may be
present, or labeling themselves as a member of another gender may occur. In other cases, the
gender expression appears later, usually at entry into elementary school. Children may
sometimes express discomfort with their sexual anatomy or will state the desire to have a sexual
anatomy corresponding to their experienced gender (“anatomic dysphoria”). Expressions of
anatomic dysphoria become more common as children with gender dysphoria approach and
anticipate puberty.
No general population studies exist of adolescent or adult outcomes of childhood gender
variance. Some prepubescent children expressing a desire to be another gender will not seek
gender-affirming somatic treatments when they reach puberty. They frequently report
nonheterosexual orientations and frequently marked gender-nonconforming behavior, although
not necessarily a transgender identity in adolescence/young adulthood. Some children with
gender dysphoria in childhood that remits in adolescence may experience a recurrence in
adulthood.
In individuals assigned male at birth, studies from North America and the Netherlands found
persistence ranged from 2% to 39%. In individuals assigned female at birth, persistence ranged
from 12% to 50%. Persistence of gender dysphoria is modestly correlated with dimensional
measures of severity ascertained at the time of a childhood baseline assessment. Early social
transition may also be a factor in persistence of gender dysphoria in adolescence.
Studies have shown a high incidence of sexual attraction to those of the individual’s birth-
assigned gender, regardless of the trajectory of the prepubescent child’s gender dysphoria. For
individuals whose gender dysphoria continues into adolescence and beyond, most self-identify as
heterosexual. In those who no longer have gender dysphoria by the time of adolescence, a
majority self-identify as gay, lesbian, or bisexual.
Two broad trajectories have been described for development of gender dysphoria in
individuals who identify as either male or female.
