Gender dysphoria in association with a disorder of sex development.
Temperamental.
As opposed to gender-nonconforming children, individuals with prepubertal-onset gender
dysphoria have symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria for gender dysphoria in childhood. The
dysphoria can continue into adolescence and adulthood; alternatively, some individuals go
through a period in which the gender dysphoria either desists or is denied. At such times, these
individuals may self-identify as being gay or lesbian. Some may identify as heterosexual and
cisgender. However, it is possible that some of these individuals may experience a recurrence of
gender dysphoria later in life.
Regardless of whether the individual’s gender dysphoria persists or desists at a later date,
either the onset of puberty or the realization that puberty will begin with development of
secondary sex characteristics can prompt distressing feelings of gender incongruence that can
exacerbate the individual’s gender dysphoria.
The early/prepubertal-onset group often present for clinical, gender-affirming care during
childhood, during adolescence, or in young adulthood. This may reflect a more intense gender
dysphoria compared with individuals with late/postpubertal-onset gender dysphoria, whose
distress may be more variable and less intense.
517
Late-onset or pubertal/postpubertal-onset gender dysphoria occurs around puberty or even
much later in life. Some of these individuals report having had a desire to be of another gender in
childhood that was not expressed verbally to others or had gender-nonconforming behavior that
did not meet full criteria for gender dysphoria in childhood. Others have no recollection of any
signs of childhood gender dysphoria. Parents of individuals with gender dysphoria of
pubertal/postpubertal-onset often report surprise, as they saw no signs of gender dysphoria
during childhood.
Individuals 
with 
DSDs 
who
require early medical intervention or decisions about gender assignment come to clinical
attention at an early age. Depending on the condition, they may have been gonadectomized
(often because of risk of future malignancy) before puberty so that administration of exogenous
hormones is part of routine care to induce puberty. Infertility is common whether due to the
condition itself or to gonadectomy, and genital surgery may have been done in infancy or
childhood with the intent of affirming the assigned gender to both the affected individual and
caregivers.
Affected individuals may exhibit gender-nonconforming behavior starting in early childhood
in a manner that is predictable depending on the specific DSD syndrome and the gender
assignment, and thresholds for supporting social and medical gender transition in minors have
traditionally been much lower for those with compared to those without DSDs. As individuals
with some DSD syndromes become aware of their condition and medical history, many
experience uncertainty about their gender, as opposed to developing a firm conviction that they
are of another gender. The proportion who develop gender dysphoria and progress to gender
transition varies markedly depending on the particular syndrome and gender assignment.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Gender-variant behavior among individuals with prepubertal-onset gender
