Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
dysphoria can develop in early preschool age. Studies suggest that a greater intensity of gender
nonconformity and an older age at presentation make persistence of gender dysphoria into
adolescence and adulthood more likely. A predisposing factor under consideration, especially in
individuals with postpubertal-onset gender dysphoria (adolescence, adulthood), includes history
of transvestism that may develop into autogynephilia (i.e., sexual arousal associated with the
thought or image of oneself as a woman).
Individuals assigned male at birth with gender dysphoria without a DSD (in both
childhood and adolescence) more commonly have older brothers when compared with cisgender
males.
For individuals with gender dysphoria without a DSD, some genetic
contribution is suggested by evidence for (weak) familiality of gender dysphoria among nontwin
siblings, increased concordance for gender dysphoria in monozygotic compared with dizygotic
same-sex twins, and some degree of heritability of gender dysphoria. Research suggests that
gender dysphoria has a polygenetic basis involving interactions of several genes and
polymorphisms that may affect in utero sexual differentiation of the brain, contributing to gender
dysphoria in individuals assigned male at birth.
As to endocrine findings in individuals with gender dysphoria, no endogenous systemic
abnormalities in sex-hormone levels have been found in 46,XY individuals, whereas there appear
to be increased androgen levels (in the range found in hirsute women but far below normal male
levels) in 46,XX individuals. Overall, current evidence is insufficient to label gender dysphoria
without a DSD as a form of intersexuality limited to the central nervous system.
In gender dysphoria associated with a DSD, the likelihood of later gender dysphoria is
increased if prenatal production and utilization (via receptor sensitivity) of androgens are grossly
variant relative to what is usually seen in individuals with the same assigned
518
gender. Examples include 46,XY individuals with a history of normal male prenatal hormone
milieu but inborn nonhormonal genital defects (as in cloacal bladder exstrophy or penile
agenesis) and who have been assigned to the female gender. The likelihood of gender dysphoria
is further enhanced by additional, prolonged, highly gender-variant postnatal androgen exposure
with somatic virilization as may occur in female-raised and noncastrated 46,XY individuals with
5-alpha reductase-2 deficiency or 17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3 deficiency or in
female-raised 46,XX individuals with classical congenital adrenal hyperplasia with prolonged
periods of nonadherence to glucocorticoid replacement therapy. However, the prenatal androgen
milieu is more closely related to gendered behavior than to gender identity. Many individuals
with DSDs and markedly gender-variant behavior do not develop gender dysphoria. Thus,
gender-nonconforming behavior by itself should not be interpreted as an indicator of current or
future gender dysphoria. There appears to be a higher rate of gender dysphoria and patient-
initiated gender change from assigned female to male than from assigned male to female in
individuals prenatally exposed to a full complement of masculinizing hormonal influences.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Individuals with gender dysphoria have been reported across many countries and cultural
