contexts around the world. The equivalent of gender dysphoria has also been reported in
individuals living in cultural contexts with institutionalized gender identity categories other than
men/boys or women/girls that sanction gender nonconforming development. These include India,
Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Oman, Samoa, Thailand, and Indigenous Peoples of North America. It is
unclear however, in such cultural contexts, whether the diagnostic criteria for gender dysphoria
would be met with these individuals.
The prevalence of coexisting mental health problems differs among cultures; these
differences may also be related to differences in attitudes toward gender nonconformity in
children, adolescents, and adults. However, also in some non-Western cultures, anxiety has been
found to be relatively common in individuals with gender dysphoria, even in cultures with
accepting attitudes toward gender-variant behavior.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Sex differences in rate of referrals to specialty clinics vary by age group. In children, sex ratios
of individuals assigned male at birth to individuals assigned female at birth range from 1.25:1 to
4.3:1. Studies show increasing numbers of children and adolescents presenting to specialty
clinics, presentation at younger ages, more frequent early social transition, and a shift to a greater
number of individuals assigned female at birth in adolescents and young adults than individuals
assigned male at birth. In adults, estimates generally suggest more individuals assigned male at
birth seek gender-affirming treatment, with ratios ranging from 1:1 to 6.1:1 in most studies in the
United States and Europe.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Rates of suicidality and suicide attempts for transgender individuals are reported to range from
30% to 80%, with risk factors including past maltreatment, gender victimization, depression,
substance abuse, and younger age. Transgender adolescents referred to gender clinics have
substantially higher rates of suicidal thoughts and behaviors when compared with nonreferred
adolescents. Prior to receiving gender-affirming treatment and legal gender reassignment,
adolescents and adults with gender dysphoria are at increased risk for suicidal thoughts and
suicide attempts. After gender-affirming treatment, adjustment varies, and while improvement in
coexisting symptoms is often seen, some individuals continue to experience prominent anxiety
and affective symptoms and remain at increased risk for suicide.
519
A study of 572 children referred for gender identity concerns in Canada and several
comparison groups (siblings, other referred children, and nonreferred children) largely from
other high-income countries found that gender-referred children were 8.6 times more likely to
self-harm or attempt suicide than comparison children, even after adjustment for overall behavior
and peer relationship problems, and particularly in the second half of childhood. Among
adolescents, the highest rate of suicide attempt is among transgender young men, followed by
those defining themselves as neither male nor female.
Functional Consequences of Gender Dysphoria
