Nonconformity to gender roles.
Transvestic disorder.
Body dysmorphic disorder.
Autism spectrum disorder.
Gender nonconformity may appear at all ages after the first 2–3 years of childhood and may
interfere with daily activities. In older children, gender nonconformity may affect peer
relationships and may lead to isolation from peer groups and to distress. Many children
experience teasing and harassment or pressure to dress in attire associated with their birth-
assigned sex, especially when growing up in a nonsupportive and nonaccepting environment.
Also in adolescents and adults, the distress resulting from gender incongruence often interferes
with daily activities. Relationship difficulties, including sexual relationship problems, are
common, and functioning at school or at work may be impaired. Gender dysphoria is associated
with high levels of stigmatization, discrimination, and victimization, leading to negative self-
concept, increased rates of depression, suicidality, and other mental disorder co-occurrence,
school dropout, and economic marginalization, including unemployment, with attendant social
and mental health risks, especially in individuals who lack family or social support. In addition,
these individuals’ access to health services and mental health services may be impeded by
structural barriers, such as institutional discomfort about, inexperience with, or hostility toward
working with this patient population.
Differential Diagnosis
Gender 
dysphoria 
should 
be 
distinguished 
from 
simple
nonconformity to stereotypical gender role behavior by the strong desire to be of another gender
than the assigned one and by the extent and pervasiveness of gender-variant activities and
interests. The diagnosis is not meant to merely describe nonconformity to stereotypical gender
role behavior (e.g., “tomboyism” in girls, “girly-boy” behavior in boys, occasional cross-dressing
in adult men). Given the increased openness of gender-diverse expressions by individuals across
the entire range of the transgender spectrum, it is important that the clinical diagnosis be limited
to those individuals whose distress and impairment meet the specified criteria.
Transvestic disorder is diagnosed in heterosexual (or bisexual) adolescent
and adult males (rarely in females) for whom women’s clothing generates sexual excitement and
causes distress and/or impairment without drawing their assigned gender into question. It is
occasionally accompanied by gender dysphoria. An individual with transvestic disorder who also
has clinically significant gender dysphoria can be given both diagnoses. In some cases of
postpubertal-onset gender dysphoria in individuals assigned male at birth who are attracted to
women, cross-dressing with sexual excitement is a precursor to the diagnosis of gender
dysphoria.
An individual with body dysmorphic disorder focuses on the alteration
or removal of a specific body part because it is perceived as abnormally formed, not because it
represents a repudiated assigned gender. When an individual’s presentation meets criteria for
both gender dysphoria and body dysmorphic disorder, both diagnoses can be given. Individuals
wishing to have a healthy limb amputated (termed by some body integrity identity disorder)
because it makes them feel more “complete” usually do not wish to change gender, but rather
desire to live as an amputee or a disabled person.
In individuals with autism spectrum disorder, diagnosing gender
dysphoria can be challenging. It can be difficult to differentiate potential co-occurring
520
