Schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders.
Other clinical presentations.
gender dysphoria from an autistic preoccupation because of the concrete and rigid thinking
around gender roles and/or poor understanding of social relationships characteristic of autism
spectrum disorder.
In schizophrenia, there may rarely be delusions of
belonging to some other gender. In the absence of psychotic symptoms, insistence by an
individual with gender dysphoria that he or she is another gender is not considered a delusion.
Schizophrenia (or other psychotic disorders) and gender dysphoria may co-occur. Gender-
themed delusions may occur in up to 20% of individuals with schizophrenia. They can usually be
differentiated from gender dysphoria by their bizarre content and by waxing and waning with
remissions and exacerbations of psychotic episodes.
Some individuals with an emasculinization desire who develop an
alternative, nonmale/nonfemale gender identity do have a presentation that meets criteria for
gender dysphoria. However, some males seek genital surgery for either aesthetic reasons or to
remove psychological effects of androgens without changing male identity; in these cases, the
criteria for gender dysphoria are not met.
Comorbidity
Clinically referred children with gender dysphoria show elevated levels of anxiety, disruptive,
impulse-control, and depressive disorders. Autism spectrum disorder is more prevalent in
clinically referred adolescents and adults with gender dysphoria than in the general population.
Clinically referred adolescents and adults with gender dysphoria often have high rates of
associated mental disorders, with anxiety and depressive disorders being the most common.
Individuals who have experienced harassment and violence may also develop posttraumatic
stress disorder.
Other Specified Gender Dysphoria
F64.8
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of gender
dysphoria that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for gender
dysphoria. The other specified gender dysphoria category is used in situations in which the
clinician chooses to communicate the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the
criteria for gender dysphoria. This is done by recording “other specified gender dysphoria”
followed by the specific reason (e.g., “brief gender dysphoria,” in which symptoms meet full
criteria for gender dysphoria but the duration is less than the required 6 months).
Unspecified Gender Dysphoria
F64.9
