Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct
Disorders
Disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders include conditions
involving problems in the self-control of emotions and behaviors. While other disorders in DSM-
5 may also involve problems in emotional and/or behavioral regulation, the disorders in this
chapter are unique in that these problems are manifested in behaviors that violate the rights of
others (e.g., aggression, destruction of property) and/or that bring the individual into significant
conflict with societal norms or authority figures. The underlying causes of the problems in the
self-control of emotions and behaviors can vary greatly across the disorders in this chapter and
among individuals within a given diagnostic category.
The chapter includes oppositional defiant disorder, intermittent explosive disorder, conduct
disorder, antisocial personality disorder (which is described in the chapter “Personality
Disorders”), pyromania, kleptomania, and other specified and unspecified disruptive, impulse-
control, and conduct disorders. Although all the disorders in the chapter involve problems in both
emotional and behavioral regulation, the source of variation among the disorders is the relative
emphasis on problems in the two types of self-control. For example, the criteria for conduct
disorder focus largely on poorly controlled behaviors that violate the rights of others or that
violate major societal norms. These behaviors may or may not result from poorly controlled
emotions. Some symptoms of conduct disorder (e.g., certain forms of aggression) can be
attributable to constricted emotional responses. At the other extreme, the criteria for intermittent
explosive disorder focus largely on poorly controlled emotion, outbursts of anger that are
disproportionate to the interpersonal or other provocation or to other psychosocial stressors.
Intermediate in impact to these two disorders is oppositional defiant disorder, in which the
criteria are more evenly distributed between emotions (anger and irritation) and behaviors
(argumentativeness and defiance). Pyromania and kleptomania are characterized by poor impulse
control related to specific behaviors (fire setting or stealing) that relieve internal tension. Other
specified disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorder is a category for conditions in which
there are symptoms of conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, or other disruptive,
impulse-control, and conduct disorders, but the number or type of symptoms does not meet the
diagnostic threshold for any of the disorders in this chapter, even though there is evidence of
clinically significant impairment associated with the symptoms.
The disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders all tend to be more common in boys
and men than in girls and women, although the relative degree of male predominance may differ
both across disorders and within a disorder at different ages. The disorders in this chapter tend to
have first onset in childhood or adolescence. In fact, it is very rare for either conduct disorder or
oppositional defiant disorder to first emerge in adulthood. There is a developmental relationship
between oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder, in that most cases of conduct
