F91.3
disorder previously would have had symptoms that met criteria for oppositional defiant disorder,
at least in those cases in which conduct disorder emerges prior to adolescence. However, most
children with oppositional defiant disorder do not eventually develop conduct disorder.
Furthermore, children with
522
oppositional defiant disorder are at risk for eventually developing other problems besides
conduct disorder, including anxiety and depressive disorders.
Many of the symptoms that define the disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders are
behaviors that can occur to some degree in typically developing persons. Thus, it is critical that
the frequency, persistence, pervasiveness across situations, and impairment associated with the
behaviors indicative of the diagnosis be considered relative to what is normative for a person’s
age, gender, and culture when determining if they are symptomatic of a disorder.
The disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders have been linked to a common
externalizing spectrum associated with the personality dimensions of disinhibition and negative
emotionality (some facets); and inversely with constraint and agreeableness. These shared
personality dimensions could account for the high level of comorbidity among these disorders
and their frequent comorbidity with substance use disorders and antisocial personality disorder.
However, the specific nature of the shared diathesis that constitutes the externalizing spectrum
remains unknown.
Oppositional Defiant Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A 
pattern 
of 
angry/irritable 
mood, 
argumentative/defiant 
behavior, 
or
vindictiveness lasting at least 6 months as evidenced by at least four symptoms
from any of the following categories, and exhibited during interaction with at least
one individual who is not a sibling.
Angry/Irritable Mood
1. Often loses temper.
2. Is often touchy or easily annoyed.
3. Is often angry and resentful.
Argumentative/Defiant Behavior
4. Often argues with authority figures or, for children and adolescents, with
adults.
5. Often actively defies or refuses to comply with requests from authority figures
or with rules.
6. Often deliberately annoys others.
7. Often blames others for his or her mistakes or misbehavior.
