Vindictiveness
8. Has been spiteful or vindictive at least twice within the past 6 months.
Note: The persistence and frequency of these behaviors should be used to
distinguish a behavior that is within normal limits from a behavior that is
symptomatic. For children younger than 5 years, the behavior should occur on
most days for a period of at least 6 months unless otherwise noted (Criterion
A8). For individuals 5 years or older, the behavior should occur at least once
per week for at least 6 months, unless otherwise noted (Criterion A8). While
these frequency criteria provide guidance on a minimal level of frequency to
define symptoms, other factors should also be considered, such as whether the
frequency and intensity of the behaviors are outside a range that is normative
for the individual’s developmental level, gender, and culture.
B. The disturbance in behavior is associated with distress in the individual or others
in his or her immediate social context (e.g., family, peer group, work colleagues),
or it impacts negatively on social, educational, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning.
523
C. The behaviors do not occur exclusively during the course of a psychotic,
substance use, depressive, or bipolar disorder. Also, the criteria are not met for
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Symptoms are confined to only one setting (e.g., at home, at school, at
work, with peers).
Moderate: Some symptoms are present in at least two settings.
Severe: Some symptoms are present in three or more settings.
Specifiers
It is not uncommon for individuals with oppositional defiant disorder to show symptoms only at
home and only with family members. However, the pervasiveness of the symptoms is an
indicator of the severity of the disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of oppositional defiant disorder is a frequent and persistent pattern of
angry/irritable mood, argumentative/defiant behavior, or vindictiveness (Criterion A). It is not
unusual for individuals with oppositional defiant disorder to show the behavioral features of the
disorder without problems of negative mood. However, individuals with the disorder who show
the angry/irritable mood symptoms typically show the behavioral features as well.
The symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder may be confined to only one setting, and this
is most frequently the home. Individuals who show enough symptoms to meet the diagnostic
threshold, even if it is only at home, may be significantly impaired in their social functioning.
