Temperamental.
Environmental.
Prevalence
The cross-national prevalence of oppositional defiant disorder ranges from 1% to 11%, with an
average prevalence estimate of around 3.3%. The rate of oppositional defiant disorder may vary
depending on the age and gender of the child. The disorder appears to be somewhat more
prevalent in boys than in girls (1.59:1) prior to adolescence. This male predominance is not
consistently found in samples of adolescents or adults.
Development and Course
The first symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder usually appear during the preschool years
and rarely later than early adolescence. Oppositional defiant disorder often precedes the
development of conduct disorder, especially for those with the childhood-onset type of conduct
disorder. However, many children and adolescents with oppositional defiant disorder do not
subsequently develop conduct disorder. Oppositional defiant disorder also conveys risk for the
development of anxiety disorders and major depressive disorder, even in the absence of conduct
disorder. The defiant, argumentative, and vindictive symptoms carry most of the risk for conduct
disorder, whereas the angry/irritable mood symptoms carry most of the risk for mood and
anxiety disorders.
Manifestations of the disorder across development appear consistent. Children and
adolescents with oppositional defiant disorder are at increased risk for a number of problems in
adjustment as adults, including functional impairments (e.g., problems in relationships with
family, peers, and romantic partners; lower educational attainment; more workplace stress), the
persistence of oppositional defiant disorder, and other psychopathology, such as antisocial
behavior, impulse-control problems, substance misuse, anxiety, and depression.
Many of the behaviors associated with oppositional defiant disorder increase in frequency
during the preschool period and in adolescence. Thus, it is especially critical during these
development periods that the frequency and intensity of these behaviors be evaluated against
normative levels before it is decided that they are symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder. For
example, it is not unusual for preschool children to show temper tantrums on a weekly basis, but
daily tantrums occur in only about 10% of preschool children.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental factors related to problems in emotional regulation (e.g., high
levels of emotional reactivity, poor frustration tolerance) have been predictive of the disorder.
525
Children with oppositional defiant disorder influence their environments, which
in turn can influence them. For example, harsh, inconsistent, or neglectful child-rearing practices
predict increases in symptoms, and oppositional symptoms predict increases in harsh and
inconsistent parenting. In children and adolescents, oppositional defiant disorder is more
prevalent in families in which childcare is disrupted by a succession of different caregivers.
Children with oppositional defiant disorder are also at greater risk for both bullying peers and
being bullied by peers.
