Genetic and physiological.
Conduct disorder.
Adjustment disorder.
A number of neurobiological markers (e.g., lower heart rate and skin
conductance reactivity; reduced basal cortisol reactivity; abnormalities in the prefrontal cortex
and amygdala) have been associated with oppositional defiant disorder. Studies have
demonstrated overlapping genetic influences for the irritability and anger symptoms of
oppositional defiant disorder with depression and generalized anxiety disorder. To date, the vast
majority of studies have not separated children with oppositional defiant disorder from those
with conduct disorder. Further study of markers specific to oppositional defiant disorder is
needed.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The reported prevalence of oppositional defiant disorder or other disruptive disorders may be
affected by misdiagnosis or overdiagnosis of individuals from some cultural backgrounds. Social
norms may affect the prevalence of the disorder and its male gender predominance in children
and adolescents. A meta-analysis of prevalence rates in middle childhood found that the disorder
is more common in boys compared with girls in Western cultures, but that the prevalence is
similar across genders in non-Western cultures. Also, despite adverse experiences, first-
generation migrants and refugees may be at decreased risk of developing oppositional defiant
disorder symptoms.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Some studies find few sex or gender differences for this disorder compared with, for example,
conduct disorder. There may be slight differences in risk factors with harsh parenting more
highly associated with oppositional defiant disorder in girls but not boys.
Functional Consequences of Oppositional Defiant Disorder
When oppositional defiant disorder is persistent throughout development, individuals with the
disorder experience frequent conflicts with parents, teachers, supervisors, peers, and romantic
partners. Such problems often result in significant impairments in the individual’s emotional,
social, academic, and occupational adjustment.
Differential Diagnosis
Conduct disorder and oppositional defiant disorder are both related to conduct
problems that bring the individual in conflict with adults and other authority figures (e.g.,
teachers, work supervisors). The behaviors of oppositional defiant disorder are typically of a less
severe nature than those of conduct disorder and do not include aggression toward people or
animals, destruction of property, or a pattern of theft or deceit. However, evidence suggests that
oppositional defiant disorder is associated with equivalent or even greater levels of impairment
than conduct disorder. Furthermore, oppositional defiant disorder includes problems of emotion
dysregulation (i.e., angry and irritable mood) that are not included in the definition of conduct
disorder.
Environmental and family stressors may be associated with externalizing
manifestations of emotion dysregulation. In children, these may manifest as
