Posttraumatic stress disorder.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Depressive and bipolar disorders.
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
Intermittent explosive disorder.
Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability).
Language disorder.
Social anxiety disorder.
526
tantrums and oppositional behavior; and in adolescents, as aggressive behaviors (e.g., rebellion
and defiance). Temporal association with a stressor and symptom duration of less than 6 months
after the resolution of the stressor may help distinguish adjustment disorder from oppositional
defiant disorder.
In children younger than 6 years, posttraumatic stress disorder may
manifest initially as dysregulated behaviors, opposition, and tantrums; the association with a
traumatic event and with other specific symptoms (traumatic play) are key to establishing the
diagnosis. In adolescents, traumatic reenactment and risk-taking may be misinterpreted as
defiance and opposition or as conduct problems.
ADHD is often comorbid with oppositional defiant disorder.
To make the additional diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder, it is important to determine
that the individual’s failure to conform to requests of others is not solely in situations that
demand sustained effort and attention or demand that the individual sit still.
Depressive and bipolar disorders often involve negative affect
and irritability. As a result, a diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder should not be made if the
symptoms occur exclusively during the course of a mood disorder.
Oppositional defiant disorder shares with disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder the symptoms of chronic irritable mood and temper outbursts. However, if
the irritable mood and other symptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder,
a diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder is not given, even if all criteria for oppositional
defiant disorder are met.
Intermittent explosive disorder also involves high rates of anger.
However, individuals with this disorder show serious aggression toward others that is not part of
the definition of oppositional defiant disorder.
In 
individuals 
with 
intellectual
developmental disorder, a diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder is given only if the
oppositional behavior is markedly greater than is commonly observed among individuals of
comparable mental age and with comparable severity of intellectual disability.
Oppositional defiant disorder must also be distinguished from a failure to
follow directions that is the result of impaired language comprehension (e.g., hearing loss).
Oppositional defiant disorder must also be distinguished from defiance
because of fear of negative evaluation associated with social anxiety disorder.
Comorbidity
Rates of oppositional defiant disorder are much higher in samples of children, adolescents, and
adults with ADHD, and this may be the result of shared temperamental risk factors. Also,
oppositional defiant disorder often precedes conduct disorder, although this appears to be most
common in children with the childhood-onset subtype. Individuals with oppositional defiant
disorder are also at increased risk for anxiety disorders and major depressive disorder, and this
seems largely attributable to the presence of the angry-irritable mood symptoms. Extremely high
