F63.81
rates of comorbidity between disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and symptoms
characteristic of oppositional defiant disorder have been reported, with most individuals with
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder having symptoms that meet criteria for oppositional
defiant disorder (such as showing argumentative/defiant symptoms); but because oppositional
defiant disorder cannot be diagnosed if criteria are also met for disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder, only disruptive mood dysregulation disorder would be diagnosed in such cases.
Adolescents and adults with oppositional defiant disorder also show a higher rate of substance
use disorders,
527
although it is unclear if this association is independent of the comorbidity with conduct disorder.
Intermittent Explosive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recurrent behavioral outbursts representing a failure to control aggressive
impulses as manifested by either of the following:
1. Verbal aggression (e.g., temper tantrums, tirades, verbal arguments or fights)
or physical aggression toward property, animals, or other individuals,
occurring twice weekly, on average, for a period of 3 months. The physical
aggression does not result in damage or destruction of property and does not
result in physical injury to animals or other individuals.
2. Three behavioral outbursts involving damage or destruction of property
and/or physical assault involving physical injury against animals or other
individuals occurring within a 12-month period.
B. The magnitude of aggressiveness expressed during the recurrent outbursts is
grossly out of proportion to the provocation or to any precipitating psychosocial
stressors.
C. The recurrent aggressive outbursts are not premeditated (i.e., they are impulsive
and/or anger-based) and are not committed to achieve some tangible objective
(e.g., money, power, intimidation).
D. The recurrent aggressive outbursts cause either marked distress in the individual
or impairment in occupational or interpersonal functioning, or are associated with
financial or legal consequences.
E. Chronological age is at least 6 years (or equivalent developmental level).
F. The recurrent aggressive outbursts are not better explained by another mental
disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder, a psychotic disorder, antisocial personality disorder,
borderline personality disorder) and are not attributable to another medical
condition (e.g., head trauma, Alzheimer’s disease) or to the physiological effects
