of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication). For children ages 6–18
years, aggressive behavior that occurs as part of an adjustment disorder should
not be considered for this diagnosis.
Note: This diagnosis can be made in addition to the diagnosis of attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, or
autism spectrum disorder when recurrent impulsive aggressive outbursts are in
excess of those usually seen in these disorders and warrant independent clinical
attention.
Diagnostic Features
The impulsive (or anger-based) aggressive outbursts in intermittent explosive disorder have a
rapid onset and, typically, little or no prodromal period. Outbursts typically last for less than 30
minutes and commonly occur in response to a minor provocation by a close intimate or associate.
Individuals with intermittent explosive disorder often have less severe episodes of verbal or
nondamaging, nondestructive, or noninjurious physical assault (Criterion A1) in between more
severe destructive/assaultive episodes (Criterion A2). Criterion A1 defines frequent (i.e., twice
weekly, on average, for a period of 3 months) aggressive outbursts characterized by temper
tantrums, tirades, verbal arguments or fights, or assault without damage to objects or without
injury to animals or other individuals. Criterion A2 defines infrequent (i.e., three in a 1-year
period) impulsive aggressive outbursts characterized by damaging or destroying an object,
regardless of its tangible value, or by
528
assaulting/striking or otherwise causing physical injury to an animal or to another individual.
Regardless of the nature of the impulsive aggressive outburst, the core feature of intermittent
explosive disorder is failure to control impulsive aggressive behavior in response to subjectively
experienced provocation (i.e., psychosocial stressor) that would not typically result in an
aggressive outburst (Criterion B). The aggressive outbursts are generally impulsive or anger-
based rather than premeditated or instrumental (Criterion C) and cause significant distress or
impairment in occupational or interpersonal functioning or are associated with financial or legal
consequences (Criterion D). A diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder should not be given to
individuals younger than 6 years, or the equivalent developmental level (Criterion E), or to
individuals whose aggressive outbursts are better explained by another mental disorder (Criterion
F). A diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder should not be given to individuals with
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder or to individuals whose impulsive aggressive outbursts
are attributable to another medical condition or to the physiological effects of a substance
(Criterion F). In addition, children ages 6–18 years should not receive this diagnosis when
impulsive aggressive outbursts occur in the context of an adjustment disorder (Criterion F).
Associated Features
Depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, and substance use disorders are associated with
intermittent explosive disorder, although onset of these disorders is typically later than that of
intermittent explosive disorder.
