Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Research provides neurobiological support for the presence of serotonergic abnormalities,
globally and in the brain, specifically in areas of the limbic system (anterior cingulate) and
orbitofrontal cortex in individuals with intermittent explosive disorder. Amygdala responses to
anger stimuli, during functional magnetic resonance imaging scanning, are greater in individuals
with intermittent explosive disorder compared with healthy persons. In addition, the volume of
gray matter in several frontolimbic regions is reduced and correlates inversely with measures of
aggression in individuals with intermittent explosive disorder, although these brain differences
are not always seen.
Prevalence
The 1-year prevalence for intermittent explosive disorder in the United States is about 2.6%, with
a lifetime prevalence of 4.0%. Higher 1-year prevalences of 3.9% and 6.9% (narrow definition)
are present among African Americans and Caribbean Black adolescents, respectively, in the
United States, especially among males. This is consistent with higher 12-month rates of
psychiatric disorder among immigrant Caribbean Black men and their second- and third-
generation offspring, possibly associated with downward social mobility and the effects of
racism. However, the reported prevalence of conduct disorder or other disruptive disorders may
be affected by misdiagnosis or overdiagnosis of individuals from some cultural backgrounds.
Intermittent explosive disorder is more prevalent among younger individuals (e.g., younger than
35–40 years), compared with individuals older than 50 years, and individuals with a high school
education or less. In some studies, the prevalence of intermittent explosive disorder is greater in
men and boys than in women and girls; other studies have found no sex or gender differences.
Development and Course
The onset of recurrent, problematic, impulsive aggressive behavior is most common in late
childhood or adolescence and rarely begins for the first time after age 40 years. The course of the
disorder may be episodic, with recurrent periods of impulsive aggressive outbursts. Intermittent
explosive disorder appears to follow a chronic and persistent course over many years. It also
appears to be quite common regardless of the presence or absence of
529
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or other disruptive, impulse-control, and
conduct disorders (e.g., conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder).
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Individuals with a history of physical and emotional trauma during the first 20
years of life are at increased risk for intermittent explosive disorder. Long-term displacement
from home and separation from family members are risk factors in some refugee population
settings.
First-degree relatives of individuals with intermittent explosive
disorder are at increased risk for intermittent explosive disorder, and twin studies have
demonstrated a substantial genetic influence for impulsive aggression.
