Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
Antisocial personality disorder or borderline personality disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The lower prevalence of intermittent explosive disorder in some regions (Asia, Middle East) or
countries (Romania, Nigeria), compared with the United States, suggests that information about
recurrent, problematic, impulsive aggressive behaviors either is not elicited on questioning or is
less likely to be present, because of cultural factors.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
A study of 1,460 research volunteers found that intermittent explosive disorder comorbid with
posttraumatic stress disorder was associated with a markedly elevated rate of lifetime suicide
attempt (41%). Posttraumatic stress disorder and intermittent explosive disorder were the only
disorders associated with suicide attempt among soldiers with suicidal ideation, although the role
of intermittent explosive disorder was less clear in multivariate analyses.
Functional Consequences of Intermittent Explosive Disorder
Social (e.g., loss of friends, relatives, marital instability), occupational (e.g., demotion, loss of
employment), financial (e.g., because of value of objects destroyed), and legal (e.g., civil suits as
a result of aggressive behavior against person or property; criminal charges for assault) problems
often develop as a result of intermittent explosive disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
A diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder should not be made when Criteria A1 and/or A2
are only met during an episode of another mental disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder,
bipolar disorder, psychotic disorder), or when impulsive aggressive outbursts are attributable to
another medical condition or to the physiological effects of a substance or medication. This
diagnosis also should not be made, particularly in children and adolescents ages 6–18 years,
when the impulsive aggressive outbursts occur in the context of an adjustment disorder.
In contrast to intermittent explosive disorder, disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder is characterized by a persistently negative mood state (i.e.,
irritability, anger) most of the day, nearly every day, between impulsive aggressive outbursts. A
diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder can only be given when the onset of
recurrent, problematic, impulsive aggressive outbursts is before age 10 years. Finally, a diagnosis
of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder should not be made for the first time after age 18
years. Otherwise, these diagnoses are mutually exclusive.
Individuals 
with 
antisocial
personality disorder or borderline personality disorder often display recurrent,
530
problematic impulsive aggressive outbursts. However, the level of impulsive aggression in
individuals with antisocial personality disorder or borderline personality disorder is lower than
that in individuals with intermittent explosive disorder.
