Delirium, major neurocognitive disorder, and personality change due to another medical
condition, aggressive type.
Substance intoxication or substance withdrawal.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, or
autism spectrum disorder.
A diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder should not be made when aggressive outbursts are
judged to result from the physiological effects of another diagnosable medical condition (e.g.,
brain injury associated with a change in personality characterized by aggressive outbursts;
complex partial epilepsy). Nonspecific abnormalities on neurological examination (e.g., “soft
signs”) and nonspecific electroencephalographic changes are compatible with a diagnosis of
intermittent explosive disorder unless there is a diagnosable medical condition that better
explains the impulsive aggressive outbursts.
A diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder
should not be made when impulsive aggressive outbursts are nearly always associated with
intoxication with or withdrawal from substances (e.g., alcohol, phencyclidine, cocaine and other
stimulants, barbiturates, inhalants). However, when a sufficient number of impulsive aggressive
outbursts also occur in the absence of substance intoxication or withdrawal, and these warrant
independent clinical attention, a diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder may be given.
Individuals with any of these childhood-onset disorders may exhibit impulsive aggressive
outbursts. Individuals with ADHD are typically impulsive and, as a result, may also exhibit
impulsive aggressive outbursts. While individuals with conduct disorder can exhibit impulsive
aggressive outbursts, the form of aggression characterized by the diagnostic criteria is proactive
and predatory. Aggression in oppositional defiant disorder is typically characterized by temper
tantrums and verbal arguments with authority figures, whereas impulsive aggressive outbursts in
intermittent explosive disorder are in response to a broader array of provocation and include
physical assault. The level of impulsive aggression in individuals with a history of one or more
of these disorders has been reported as lower than that in comparable individuals whose
symptoms also meet intermittent explosive disorder Criteria A through E. Accordingly, if
Criteria A through E are also met, and the impulsive aggressive outbursts warrant independent
clinical attention, a diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder may be given.
Comorbidity
Depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder, bulimia nervosa, binge-
eating disorder, and substance use disorders are most commonly comorbid with intermittent
explosive disorder in community samples. In addition, individuals with antisocial personality
disorder or borderline personality disorder, and individuals with a history of disorders with
disruptive behaviors (e.g., ADHD, conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder), are at greater
risk for comorbid intermittent explosive disorder.
Conduct Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A repetitive and persistent pattern of behavior in which the basic rights of others
