or major age-appropriate societal norms or rules are violated, as manifested by
the presence of at least three of the following 15 criteria in the past 12 months
from any of the categories below, with at least one criterion present in the past 6
months:
531
Aggression to People and Animals
1. Often bullies, threatens, or intimidates others.
2. Often initiates physical fights.
3. Has used a weapon that can cause serious physical harm to others (e.g., a
bat, brick, broken bottle, knife, gun).
4. Has been physically cruel to people.
5. Has been physically cruel to animals.
6. Has stolen while confronting a victim (e.g., mugging, purse snatching,
extortion, armed robbery).
7. Has forced someone into sexual activity.
Destruction of Property
8. Has deliberately engaged in fire setting with the intention of causing serious
damage.
9. Has deliberately destroyed others’ property (other than by fire setting).
Deceitfulness or Theft
10. Has broken into someone else’s house, building, or car.
11. Often lies to obtain goods or favors or to avoid obligations (i.e., “cons”
others).
12. Has stolen items of nontrivial value without confronting a victim (e.g.,
shoplifting, but without breaking and entering; forgery).
Serious Violations of Rules
13. Often stays out at night despite parental prohibitions, beginning before age 13
years.
14. Has run away from home overnight at least twice while living in the parental
or parental surrogate home, or once without returning for a lengthy period.
15. Is often truant from school, beginning before age 13 years.
B. The disturbance in behavior causes clinically significant impairment in social,
academic, or occupational functioning.
C. If the individual is age 18 years or older, criteria are not met for antisocial
personality disorder.
Specify whether:
F91.1 Childhood-onset type: Individuals show at least one symptom
characteristic of conduct disorder prior to age 10 years.
F91.2 Adolescent-onset type: Individuals show no symptom characteristic of
