conduct disorder prior to age 10 years.
F91.9 Unspecified onset: Criteria for a diagnosis of conduct disorder are met,
but there is not enough information available to determine whether the onset of
the first symptom was before or after age 10 years.
Specify if:
With limited prosocial emotions: To qualify for this specifier, an individual
must have displayed at least two of the following characteristics persistently over
at least 12 months and in multiple relationships and settings. These
characteristics reflect the individual’s typical pattern of interpersonal and
emotional functioning over this period and not just occasional occurrences in
some situations. Thus, to assess the criteria for the specifier, multiple information
sources are necessary. In addition to the individual’s self-report, it is necessary
to consider reports by others who have known the individual for extended
periods of time (e.g., parents, teachers, co-workers, extended family members,
peers).
532
Lack of remorse or guilt: Does not feel bad or guilty when he or she does
something wrong (exclude remorse when expressed only when caught and/or
facing punishment). The individual shows a general lack of concern about the
negative consequences of his or her actions. For example, the individual is not
remorseful after hurting someone or does not care about the consequences of
breaking rules.
Callous—lack of empathy: Disregards and is unconcerned about the feelings
of others. The individual is described as cold and uncaring. The individual
appears more concerned about the effects of his or her actions on himself or
herself, rather than their effects on others, even when they result in substantial
harm to others.
Unconcerned about performance: Does not show concern about
poor/problematic performance at school, at work, or in other important
activities. The individual does not put forth the effort necessary to perform well,
even when expectations are clear, and typically blames others for his or her
poor performance.
Shallow or deficient affect: Does not express feelings or show emotions to
others, except in ways that seem shallow, insincere, or superficial (e.g.,
actions contradict the emotion displayed; can turn emotions “on” or “off”
quickly) or when emotional expressions are used for gain (e.g., emotions
displayed to manipulate or intimidate others).
Specify current severity:
Mild: Few if any conduct problems in excess of those required to make the
diagnosis are present, and conduct problems cause relatively minor harm to
others (e.g., lying, truancy, staying out after dark without permission, other rule
