breaking).
Moderate: The number of conduct problems and the effect on others are
intermediate between those specified in “mild” and those in “severe” (e.g.,
stealing without confronting a victim, vandalism).
Severe: Many conduct problems in excess of those required to make the
diagnosis are present, or conduct problems cause considerable harm to others
(e.g., forced sex, physical cruelty, use of a weapon, stealing while confronting a
victim, breaking and entering).
Subtypes
Three subtypes of conduct disorder are provided based on the age at onset of the disorder. Both
childhood-onset and adolescent-onset subtypes can occur in a mild, moderate, or severe form. An
unspecified-onset subtype is designated when there is insufficient information to determine age
at onset.
In childhood-onset conduct disorder, individuals are usually male, have disturbed peer
relationships, may have had oppositional defiant disorder during early childhood, and usually
have symptoms that meet full criteria for conduct disorder prior to puberty. Individuals with the
childhood-onset type may be more likely to display aggression toward others than individuals
with the adolescent-onset type. Many children with this subtype also have concurrent attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or other neurodevelopmental difficulties. Individuals with
childhood-onset type are more likely to have persistent conduct disorder into adulthood than are
those with adolescent-onset type. Individuals with adolescent-onset conduct disorder tend to
have more normative peer relationships (although they often display conduct problems in the
company of others).
Specifiers
A minority of individuals with conduct disorder exhibit characteristics that qualify for the “with
limited prosocial emotions” specifier. The indicators of this specifier are those that have often
been labeled as callous and unemotional traits in research. Other personality features, such as
thrill seeking, fearlessness, and insensitivity to punishment, may also distinguish those with
characteristics described in the specifier. Individuals with
533
characteristics described in this specifier may be more likely than other individuals with conduct
disorder to engage in aggression that is planned for instrumental gain. Individuals with conduct
disorder of any subtype or any level of severity can have characteristics that qualify for the
specifier “with limited prosocial emotions,” although individuals with the specifier are more
likely to have childhood-onset type and a severity specifier rating of severe.
Although the validity of self-report to assess the presence of the specifier has been supported
in some research contexts, individuals with conduct disorder with this specifier may not readily
admit to the traits in a clinical interview. Thus, to assess the criteria for the specifier, multiple
information sources are necessary. Also, because the indicators of the specifier are characteristics
