that reflect the individual’s typical pattern of interpersonal and emotional functioning, it is
important to consider reports by others who have known the individual for extended periods of
time and across relationships and settings (e.g., parents, teachers, co-workers, extended family
members, peers).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of conduct disorder is a repetitive and persistent pattern of behavior in
which the basic rights of others or major age-appropriate societal norms or rules are violated
(Criterion A). These behaviors fall into four main groupings: aggressive conduct that causes or
threatens physical harm to other people or animals (Criteria A1–A7); nonaggressive conduct that
causes property loss or damage (Criteria A8–A9); deceitfulness or theft (Criteria A10–A12); and
serious violations of rules (Criteria A13–A15). Three or more characteristic behaviors must have
been present during the past 12 months, with at least one behavior present in the past 6 months.
The disturbance in behavior causes clinically significant impairment in social, academic, or
occupational functioning (Criterion B). The behavior pattern is usually present in a variety of
settings, such as home, at school, or in the community. Because individuals with conduct
disorder are likely to minimize their conduct problems, the clinician often must rely on additional
informants. However, informants’ knowledge of the individual’s conduct problems may be
limited if they have inadequately supervised the individual or the individual has concealed
symptom behaviors.
Individuals with conduct disorder often initiate aggressive behavior and react aggressively to
others. They may display bullying, threatening, or intimidating behavior (including bullying via
messaging on web-based social media) (Criterion A1); initiate frequent physical fights (Criterion
A2); use a weapon that can cause serious physical harm (e.g., a bat, brick, broken bottle, knife,
gun) (Criterion A3); be physically cruel to people (Criterion A4) or animals (Criterion A5); steal
while confronting a victim (e.g., mugging, purse snatching, extortion, armed robbery) (Criterion
A6); or force someone into sexual activity (Criterion A7). Physical violence may take the form
of rape, assault, or, in rare cases, homicide. Deliberate destruction of others’ property may
include deliberate fire setting with the intention of causing serious damage (Criterion A8) or
deliberate destroying of other people’s property in other ways (e.g., smashing car windows,
vandalizing school property) (Criterion A9). Acts of deceitfulness or theft may include breaking
into someone else’s house, building, or car (Criterion A10); frequently lying or breaking
promises to obtain goods or favors or to avoid debts or obligations (e.g., “conning” other
individuals) (Criterion A11); or stealing items of nontrivial value without confronting the victim
(e.g., shoplifting, forgery, fraud) (Criterion A12).
Individuals with conduct disorder may also frequently commit serious violations of rules
(e.g., school, parental, workplace). Children with conduct disorder often have a pattern,
beginning before age 13 years, of staying out late at night despite parental prohibitions (Criterion
A13). Children may also show a pattern of running away from home overnight (Criterion A14).
To be considered a symptom of conduct disorder, the running away must have occurred at least
twice (or only once if the individual did not return for a lengthy period). Runaway episodes that
occur as a direct consequence of physical or sexual abuse do not typically qualify for this
criterion. Children with conduct disorder may often be truant from school, beginning prior to age
13 years (Criterion A15).
