534
Associated Features
Especially in ambiguous situations, aggressive individuals with conduct disorder frequently
misperceive the intentions of others as more hostile and threatening than is the case and respond
with aggression that they then feel is reasonable and justified. Personality features of trait
negative emotionality and poor self-control, including poor frustration tolerance, irritability,
temper outbursts, suspiciousness, insensitivity to punishment, thrill seeking, and recklessness,
frequently co-occur with conduct disorder. Substance misuse is often an associated feature,
particularly in adolescent girls.
Prevalence
One-year population prevalence estimates in the United States and other largely high-income
countries range from 2% to more than 10%, with a median of 4%. In the United States, the
lifetime prevalence was found to be 12.0% among men and 7.1% among women. The prevalence
of conduct disorder in largely Western samples appears to be fairly consistent across various
countries. Prevalence rates rise from childhood to adolescence. Prevalence of adolescent-onset
conduct disorder is more frequently associated with psychosocial stressors—for example, being a
member of a socially oppressed ethnic group facing discrimination. Few children with impairing
conduct disorder receive treatment.
Development and Course
The onset of conduct disorder may occur as early as the preschool years, but the first significant
symptoms usually emerge during the period from middle childhood through middle adolescence.
Oppositional defiant disorder is a common precursor to the childhood-onset type of conduct
disorder. Physically aggressive symptoms are more common than nonaggressive symptoms
during childhood, but nonaggressive symptoms become more common than aggressive
symptoms during adolescence.
Conduct disorder may be diagnosed in adults; however, symptoms of conduct disorder
usually emerge in childhood or adolescence, and onset is rare after age 16 years. The course of
conduct disorder after onset is variable. In a majority of individuals, the disorder remits by
adulthood. Many individuals with conduct disorder—particularly those with adolescent-onset
type and those with few and milder symptoms—achieve adequate social and occupational
adjustment as adults. However, the childhood-onset type predicts a worse prognosis and an
increased risk of criminal behavior, conduct disorder, and substance-related disorders in
adulthood. Individuals with conduct disorder are at risk for later mood disorders, anxiety
disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder, impulse-control disorders, psychotic disorders, somatic
symptom disorders, and substance-related disorders as adults.
Symptoms of the disorder vary with age as the individual develops increased physical
strength, cognitive abilities, and sexual maturity. Symptom behaviors that emerge first tend to be
less serious (e.g., lying, shoplifting), whereas conduct problems that emerge last tend to be more
severe (e.g., rape, theft while confronting a victim). However, there are wide differences among
individuals, with some engaging in the more damaging behaviors at an early age (which is
