Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Course modifiers.
predictive of a worse prognosis). When individuals with conduct disorder reach adulthood,
symptoms of aggression, property destruction, deceitfulness, and rule violation, including
violence against co-workers, partners, and children, may be exhibited in the workplace and the
home, such that antisocial personality disorder may be considered.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental risk factors include a difficult undercontrolled infant
temperament and lower-than-average intelligence, particularly with regard to verbal IQ.
Family-level risk factors include parental rejection and neglect, inconsistent
child-rearing practices, harsh discipline, physical or sexual abuse, lack of supervision,
535
early institutional living, frequent changes of caregivers, large family size, parental criminality,
and certain kinds of familial psychopathology (e.g., substance-related disorders). Community-
level risk factors include peer rejection, association with a delinquent peer group, neighborhood
disadvantage, and exposure to violence. Both types of risk factors tend to be more common and
severe among individuals with the childhood-onset subtype of conduct disorder. On the other
hand, parental migration is a risk factor for children who are left in the country of origin as well
as for those who migrated with their parents, with conduct problems being attributable to
acculturation processes. Nevertheless, first-generation immigrants and refugees often have fewer
conduct problems than their peers.
Conduct disorder is influenced by both genetic and environmental
factors. Genetic associations may be stronger for aggressive symptoms. The risk is increased in
children with a biological or adoptive parent or a sibling with conduct disorder. The disorder also
appears to be more common in children of biological parents with severe alcohol use disorder,
depressive and bipolar disorders, or schizophrenia or biological parents who have a history of
ADHD or conduct disorder. Family history particularly characterizes individuals with the
childhood-onset subtype of conduct disorder. Slower resting heart rate has been reliably noted in
individuals with conduct disorder compared with those without the disorder, and this marker is
not characteristic of any other mental disorder. Reduced autonomic fear conditioning,
particularly low skin conductance, is also well documented. However, these psychophysiological
findings are not diagnostic of the disorder. Structural and functional differences in brain areas
associated with affect regulation and affect processing, particularly frontotemporal-limbic
connections involving the brain’s ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala, have been consistently
noted in individuals with conduct disorder compared with those without the disorder. However,
neuroimaging findings are not diagnostic of the disorder.
Persistence is more likely for individuals with behaviors that meet criteria for
the childhood-onset subtype and qualify for the specifier “with limited prosocial emotions.” The
risk that conduct disorder will persist is also increased by co-occurring ADHD and by substance
abuse.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
