Oppositional defiant disorder.
Conduct disorder diagnosis may at times be misapplied to individuals in settings where patterns
of disruptive behavior are viewed as near-normative (e.g., in very threatening, high-crime areas
or war zones). Therefore, the context in which the undesirable behaviors have occurred should be
considered. In youth from underserved ethnic and racialized groups, reactions to racism that
involve anger and resistance-based coping may be misdiagnosed as conduct disorder by
uninformed practitioners, as suggested by the association between experiences of discrimination
and adolescent-onset conduct disorder in these groups.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Boys and men with a diagnosis of conduct disorder frequently exhibit fighting, stealing,
vandalism, and school discipline problems. Girls and women with a diagnosis of conduct
disorder are more likely to exhibit lying, truancy, running away, and prostitution. Whereas boys
and men and girls and women exhibit relational aggression (behavior that harms social
relationships of others), girls and women exhibit considerably less physical aggression than do
boys and men.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Suicidal thoughts, suicide attempts, and suicide occur at a higher-than-expected rate in
individuals with conduct disorder. A large study conducted in Taiwan that followed adolescents
with conduct disorder over 10 years found that conduct disorder was associated
536
with a higher rate of suicide attempts even after adjustment for comorbid mood, anxiety, and
substance use disorders.
Functional Consequences of Conduct Disorder
Conduct disorder behaviors may lead to school suspension or expulsion, problems in work
adjustment, legal difficulties, sexually transmitted diseases, unplanned pregnancy, and physical
injury from accidents or fights. These problems may preclude attendance in ordinary schools or
living in a parental or foster home. Conduct disorder is often associated with an early onset of
sexual behavior, alcohol use, tobacco smoking, use of illegal substances, and reckless and risk-
taking acts. Accident rates appear to be higher among individuals with conduct disorder
compared with those without the disorder. These functional consequences of conduct disorder
may increase the risk for health difficulties when individuals reach midlife. It is not uncommon
for individuals with conduct disorder to come into contact with the criminal justice system for
engaging in illegal behavior. Conduct disorder is a common reason for treatment referral and is
frequently diagnosed in mental health facilities for children, especially in forensic practice. It is
associated with impairment that is more severe and chronic than that experienced by other clinic-
referred children.
Differential Diagnosis
Conduct disorder and oppositional defiant disorder are both related
