Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Depressive and bipolar disorders.
Intermittent explosive disorder.
Adjustment disorders.
to symptoms that bring the individual in conflict with adults and other authority figures (e.g.,
parents, teachers, work supervisors). The behaviors of oppositional defiant disorder are typically
of a less severe nature than those of individuals with conduct disorder and do not include
aggression toward people or animals, destruction of property, or a pattern of theft or deceit.
Furthermore, oppositional defiant disorder includes problems of emotion dysregulation (i.e.,
angry and irritable mood) that are not included in the definition of conduct disorder. When
criteria are met for both oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder, both diagnoses can
be given.
Although children with ADHD often exhibit hyperactive
and impulsive behavior that may be disruptive, this behavior does not by itself violate societal
norms or the rights of others and therefore does not usually meet criteria for conduct disorder.
When criteria are met for both ADHD and conduct disorder, both diagnoses should be given.
Irritability, aggression, and conduct problems can occur in
children or adolescents with major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, or disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder. The behavioral problems associated with these mood disorders can
usually be distinguished from the pattern of conduct problems seen in conduct disorder based on
their course. Specifically, individuals with conduct disorder will display substantial levels of
aggressive or nonaggressive conduct problems during periods in which there is no mood
disturbance, either historically (i.e., a history of conduct problems predating the onset of the
mood disturbance) or concurrently (i.e., display of some conduct problems that are premeditated
and do not occur during periods of intense emotional arousal). In those cases in which criteria for
conduct disorder and a mood disorder are met, both diagnoses can be given.
Both conduct disorder and intermittent explosive disorder involve
high rates of aggression. However, the aggression in individuals with intermittent explosive
disorder is limited to impulsive aggression and is not premeditated, and it is not committed in
order to achieve some tangible objective (e.g., money, power, intimidation). Also, the definition
of intermittent explosive disorder does not include the non-aggressive symptoms of conduct
disorder. If criteria for both disorders are met, the diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder
should be given only when the recurrent impulsive aggressive outbursts warrant independent
clinical attention.
537
The diagnosis of an adjustment disorder (with disturbance of conduct or
with mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct) should be considered if clinically significant
conduct problems that do not meet the criteria for another specific disorder develop in clear
association with the onset of a psychosocial stressor and do not resolve within 6 months of the
termination of the stressor (or its consequences). Conduct disorder is diagnosed only when the
conduct problems represent a repetitive and persistent pattern that is associated with impairment
in social, academic, or occupational functioning.
Comorbidity
ADHD and oppositional defiant disorder are both common in individuals with conduct disorder,
and this comorbid presentation predicts worse outcomes. Individuals who show the personality
