F63.1
features associated with antisocial personality disorder often violate the basic rights of others or
violate major age-appropriate societal norms, and as a result their pattern of behavior often meets
criteria for conduct disorder. Conduct disorder may also co-occur with one or more of the
following mental disorders: specific learning disorder, anxiety disorders, depressive or bipolar
disorders, and substance-related disorders. Academic achievement, particularly in reading and
other verbal skills, is often below the level expected on the basis of age and intelligence and may
justify the additional diagnosis of specific learning disorder or a communication disorder.
Antisocial Personality Disorder
Criteria and text for antisocial personality disorder can be found in the chapter “Personality
Disorders.” Because this disorder is closely connected to the spectrum of “externalizing” conduct
disorders in this chapter, as well as to the disorders in the adjoining chapter “Substance-Related
and Addictive Disorders,” it is listed here as well as in the chapter “Personality Disorders.”
Pyromania
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Deliberate and purposeful fire setting on more than one occasion.
B. Tension or affective arousal before the act.
C. Fascination with, interest in, curiosity about, or attraction to fire and its situational
contexts (e.g., paraphernalia, uses, consequences).
D. Pleasure, gratification, or relief when setting fires or when witnessing or
participating in their aftermath.
E. The fire setting is not done for monetary gain, as an expression of sociopolitical
ideology, to conceal criminal activity, to express anger or vengeance, to improve
one’s living circumstances, in response to a delusion or hallucination, or as a
result of impaired judgment (e.g., in major neurocognitive disorder, intellectual
developmental disorder [intellectual disability], substance intoxication).
F. The fire setting is not better explained by conduct disorder, a manic episode, or
antisocial personality disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of pyromania is the presence of multiple episodes of deliberate and
purposeful fire setting (Criterion A). Individuals with this disorder experience tension or
affective arousal before setting a fire (Criterion B). There is a fascination with, interest in,
538
curiosity about, or attraction to fire and its situational contexts (e.g., paraphernalia, uses,
