consequences) (Criterion C). Individuals with this disorder are often regular “watchers” at fires
in their neighborhoods, may set off false alarms, and derive pleasure from institutions,
equipment, and personnel associated with fire. They may spend time at the local fire department,
set fires to be affiliated with the fire department, or even become firefighters. Individuals with
this disorder experience pleasure, gratification, or relief when setting the fire, witnessing its
effects, or participating in its aftermath (Criterion D). The fire setting is not done for monetary
gain, as an expression of sociopolitical ideology, to conceal criminal activity, to express anger or
vengeance, to improve one’s living circumstances, or in response to a delusion or a hallucination
(Criterion E). The fire setting does not result from impaired judgment (e.g., in major
neurocognitive disorder or intellectual developmental disorder [intellectual disability]). The
diagnosis is not made if the fire setting is better explained by conduct disorder, a manic episode,
or antisocial personality disorder (Criterion F).
Associated Features
Individuals with pyromania may make considerable advance preparation for starting a fire. They
may be indifferent to the consequences to life or property caused by the fire, or they may derive
satisfaction from the resulting property destruction. The behaviors may lead to property damage,
legal consequences, or injury or loss of life to the fire setter or to others. Individuals who
impulsively set fires (who may or may not have pyromania) often have a current or past history
of alcohol use disorder.
Prevalence
The population prevalence of pyromania is not known. The lifetime prevalence of fire-setting
behavior, which is just one component of pyromania and not sufficient for a diagnosis by itself,
was reported as 1.0%–1.1% in a population sample. Fire-setting behavior occurs more often in
men than in women (lifetime prevalence 1.7% vs. 0.4%); however, whether this also holds true
for pyromania is unknown. The most common comorbidities of fire-setting behavior were
antisocial personality disorder, substance use disorder, bipolar disorder, and gambling disorder.
In contrast to fire setting, pyromania as a primary diagnosis appears to be very rare. Among a
sample of persons in a Finnish hospital reaching the criminal system because of repeated fire
setting, only 3.3% had symptoms that met full criteria for pyromania. In a U.S. study, 3.4% of a
sample of adults hospitalized for psychiatric reasons had symptoms that met full criteria for
current pyromania.
Development and Course
Although data are limited, some research suggests that late adolescence may be the typical age at
onset of pyromania. The relationship between fire setting in childhood and pyromania in
adulthood has not been documented. In individuals with pyromania, fire-setting incidents are
episodic and may wax and wane in frequency. Longitudinal course is unknown. Although fire
setting is a major problem in children and adolescents (over 40% of those arrested for arson
offenses in the United States are younger than 18 years), pyromania in childhood appears to be
rare. Juvenile fire setting is usually associated with conduct disorder, attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, or an adjustment disorder.
