Other causes of intentional fire setting.
Other mental disorders.
F63.2
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
While fire setting is associated with antisocial behavior in men and women, they differ on some
of the antisocial behaviors that accompany fire setting. Whether this holds for pyromania, which
is a subset of those with fire setting, is unknown.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
A study of a consecutive sample of male fire setters who had a forensic assessment compared
each case with four age-, sex-, and place of birth–matched controls and found that
539
fire setting was associated during follow-up with higher rates of suicide and also suicide attempt.
Whether these differences apply to pyromania is unknown.
Differential Diagnosis
It is important to rule out other causes of fire setting before
giving the diagnosis of pyromania. Intentional fire setting may occur for profit, sabotage, or
revenge; to conceal a crime; to make a political statement (e.g., an act of terrorism or protest); or
to attract attention or recognition (e.g., setting a fire in order to discover it and save the day). Fire
setting may also occur as part of developmental experimentation in childhood (e.g., playing with
matches, lighters, or fire).
A separate diagnosis of pyromania is not given when fire setting occurs as
part of conduct disorder, a manic episode, or antisocial personality disorder, or if it occurs in
response to a delusion or a hallucination (e.g., in schizophrenia) or is attributable to the
physiological effects of another medical condition (e.g., epilepsy). The diagnosis of pyromania
should also not be given when fire setting results from impaired judgment associated with major
neurocognitive disorder, intellectual developmental disorder, or substance intoxication.
Comorbidity
There appears to be a high co-occurrence of substance use disorders, gambling disorder,
depressive and bipolar disorders, and other disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders
with pyromania.
Kleptomania
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recurrent failure to resist impulses to steal objects that are not needed for
personal use or for their monetary value.
B. Increasing sense of tension immediately before committing the theft.
C. Pleasure, gratification, or relief at the time of committing the theft.
