D. The stealing is not committed to express anger or vengeance and is not in
response to a delusion or a hallucination.
E. The stealing is not better explained by conduct disorder, a manic episode, or
antisocial personality disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of kleptomania is the recurrent failure to resist impulses to steal items even
though the items are not needed for personal use or for their monetary value (Criterion A). The
individual experiences a rising subjective sense of tension before the theft (Criterion B) and feels
pleasure, gratification, or relief when committing the theft (Criterion C). The stealing is not
committed to express anger or vengeance, is not done in response to a delusion or hallucination
(Criterion D), and is not better explained by conduct disorder, a manic episode, or antisocial
personality disorder (Criterion E). The objects are stolen despite the fact that they are typically of
little value to the individual, who could have afforded to pay for them and often gives them away
or discards them. Occasionally the individual may hoard the stolen objects or surreptitiously
return them. Although individuals with this disorder will generally avoid stealing when
immediate arrest is probable (e.g., in full view of a police officer), they usually do not preplan
the thefts or fully take
540
into account the chances of apprehension. The stealing is done without assistance from, or
collaboration with, others.
Associated Features
Individuals with kleptomania typically attempt to resist the impulse to steal, and they are aware
that the act is wrong and senseless. The individual frequently fears being apprehended and often
feels depressed or guilty about the thefts. Neurotransmitter pathways associated with behavioral
addictions, including those associated with the serotonin, dopamine, and opioid systems, appear
to play a role in kleptomania as well.
Prevalence
In the United States and Canada, kleptomania occurs in about 4%–24% of individuals arrested
for shoplifting. Its prevalence in the U.S. general population is very rare, at approximately 0.3%–
0.6%. Women outnumber men at a ratio of 3:1.
Development and Course
Age at onset of kleptomania is variable, but the disorder often begins in adolescence. However,
the disorder may begin in childhood, adolescence, or adulthood, and in rare cases in late
adulthood. There is little systematic information on the course of kleptomania, but three typical
courses have been described: sporadic with brief episodes and long periods of remission;
episodic with protracted periods of stealing and periods of remission; and chronic with some
degree of fluctuation. The disorder may continue for years, despite multiple convictions for
