Genetic and physiological.
Ordinary theft.
Malingering.
Antisocial personality disorder and conduct disorder.
Manic episodes, psychotic episodes, and major neurocognitive disorder.
shoplifting.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
There appears to be a higher rate of alcohol use disorders in first-degree
relatives of individuals with kleptomania than in the general population.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Kleptomania has been associated with an increased risk for suicide attempts.
Functional Consequences of Kleptomania
The disorder may cause legal, family, career, and personal difficulties.
Differential Diagnosis
Kleptomania should be distinguished from ordinary acts of theft or shoplifting.
Ordinary theft (whether planned or impulsive) is deliberate and is motivated by the usefulness of
the object or its monetary worth. Some persons, especially adolescents, may also steal on a dare,
as an act of rebellion, or as a rite of passage. The diagnosis is not made unless other
characteristic features of kleptomania are also present. Kleptomania is rare, whereas shoplifting
is relatively common.
In malingering, individuals may simulate the symptoms of kleptomania to avoid
criminal prosecution.
Antisocial personality disorder and conduct
disorder are distinguished from kleptomania by a general pattern of antisocial behavior.
Kleptomania 
should 
be
distinguished from intentional or inadvertent stealing that may occur during a
541
manic episode, in response to delusions or hallucinations (e.g., in schizophrenia), or as a result of
a major neurocognitive disorder.
Comorbidity
Kleptomania may be associated with compulsive buying as well as with depressive and bipolar
disorders (especially major depressive disorder), anxiety disorders, eating disorders (particularly
bulimia nervosa), personality disorders, substance use disorders (especially alcohol use disorder),
and other disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders.
Other Specified Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct
Disorder
F91.8
