Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
The substance-related disorders encompass 10 separate classes of drugs:
alcohol; caffeine; cannabis; hallucinogens (with separate categories for phencyclidine [or
similarly acting arylcyclohexylamines] and other hallucinogens); inhalants; opioids; sedatives,
hypnotics, or anxiolytics; stimulants (amphetamine-type substances, cocaine, and other
stimulants); tobacco; and other (or unknown) substances. These 10 classes are not fully distinct.
All drugs that are taken in excess have in common the ability to directly activate the brain reward
systems, which are involved in the reinforcement of behaviors and establishment of memories.
Instead of achieving reward system activation through adaptive behaviors, these substances
produce such an intense activation of the reward system that normal activities may be neglected.
The pharmacological mechanisms by which each class of drugs produces reward are different,
but the drugs typically activate the system and produce feelings of pleasure, often referred to as a
“high.” Furthermore, studies suggest that the neurobiological roots of substance use disorders for
some individuals can be seen in their behaviors long before the onset of actual substance use
(e.g., lower levels of self-control may reflect impairments of brain inhibitory mechanisms);
research also suggests the negative impact of substance use itself on brain inhibitory
mechanisms.
Note that the phrase “drug addiction” is not applied as a diagnostic term in this classification,
although it is in common usage in many countries to describe severe problems related to
compulsive and habitual use of substances. The more neutral term substance use disorder is used
to describe the wide range of the disorder, from a mild form to a severe state of chronically
relapsing, compulsive pattern of drug taking. Some clinicians will choose to use the phrase “drug
addiction” to describe more severe presentations, but that wording is omitted from the official
DSM-5 substance use disorder diagnostic terminology because of its uncertain definition and its
potentially negative connotation.
In addition to the substance-related disorders, this chapter also includes gambling disorder,
reflecting evidence that gambling behaviors activate reward systems similar to those activated by
drugs of abuse and that produce some behavioral symptoms that appear comparable to those
produced by the substance use disorders. Other excessive behavioral patterns, such as Internet
gaming (see “Conditions for Further Study”), have also been described, but the research on these
and other behavioral syndromes is less clear. Thus, groups of repetitive behaviors, sometimes
termed behavioral addictions (with subcategories such as “sex addiction,” “exercise addiction,”
and “shopping addiction”), are not included because there is insufficient peer-reviewed evidence
to establish the diagnostic criteria and course descriptions needed to identify these behaviors as
mental disorders.
The substance-related disorders are divided into two groups: substance use disorders and
substance-induced disorders. The following conditions may be classified as substance-induced:
substance intoxication, substance withdrawal, and substance/medication-induced mental
