Other (or
unknown)
I/W
I/W
I/W
I/W
I/W
I/W
Note. X = The category is recognized in DSM-5.
I = The specifier “with onset during intoxication” may be noted for the category.
W = The specifier “with onset during withdrawal” may be noted for the category.
I/W = Either “with onset during intoxication” or “with onset during withdrawal” may be noted for the category. Major = major
neurocognitive disorder; mild = mild neurocognitive disorder.
*Also hallucinogen persisting perception disorder (flashbacks).
**Includes amphetamine-type substances, cocaine, and other or unspecified stimulants.
Substance-Related Disorders
Substance Use Disorders
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of a substance use disorder is a cluster of cognitive, behavioral, and
physiological symptoms indicating that the individual continues using the substance despite
significant substance-related problems. As seen in Table 1, the diagnosis of a substance use
disorder can be applied to all 10 substance classes included in this chapter except caffeine. For
certain classes, some symptoms are less salient, and in a few instances not all symptoms apply
(e.g., withdrawal symptoms are not specified for phencyclidine use disorder, other hallucinogen
use disorder, or inhalant use disorder). Of note, the consumption of substances, including
prescribed medications, may depend in part on cultural background, substance availability, and
specific local drug regulations. Thus, there can be significant local or cultural variation in
exposure (e.g., countries with cultural prohibitions against alcohol or other substance use may
have a lower prevalence of substance-related disorders).
An important characteristic of substance use disorders is an underlying change in brain
circuits that may persist beyond detoxification, particularly in individuals with severe disorders.
The behavioral effects of these brain changes may be exhibited in the repeated relapses and
intense drug craving when the individuals are exposed to drug-related stimuli. These persistent
drug effects may benefit from long-term approaches to treatment.
Overall, the diagnosis of a substance use disorder is based on a pathological pattern of
behaviors related to use of the substance. To assist with organization, the diagnostic items
making up Criterion A can be considered to fit within overall groupings of impaired control,
social impairment, risky use, and pharmacological criteria. Impaired control over substance use
is the first criteria grouping (Criteria 1–4). The individual may take the substance in larger
amounts or over a longer period than was originally intended (Criterion 1). The individual may
express a persistent desire to cut down or regulate substance use and may report
546
multiple unsuccessful efforts to decrease or discontinue use (Criterion 2). The individual may
spend a great deal of time obtaining the substance, using the substance, or recovering from its
