effects (Criterion 3). In some instances of more severe substance use disorders, virtually all of
the individual’s daily activities revolve around the substance. Craving (Criterion 4) is manifested
by an intense desire or urge for the drug that may occur at any time but is more likely when in an
environment where the drug previously was obtained or used. Craving has also been shown to
involve classical conditioning and is associated with activation of specific reward structures in
the brain. Craving might be queried by asking if there has ever been a time when there were such
strong urges to take the drug that the individual could not think of anything else. Current craving
is often used as a treatment outcome measure because it may be a signal of impending relapse.
Social impairment is the second grouping of criteria (Criteria 5–7). Recurrent substance use
may result in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at work, school, or home (Criterion 5). The
individual may continue substance use despite having persistent or recurrent social or
interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of the substance (Criterion 6).
Important social, occupational, or recreational activities may be given up or reduced because of
substance use (Criterion 7). The individual may withdraw from family activities and hobbies in
order to use the substance.
Risky use of the substance is the third grouping of criteria (Criteria 8–9). This may take the
form of recurrent substance use in situations in which it is physically hazardous (Criterion 8).
The individual may continue substance use despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent
physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by the
substance (Criterion 9). The key issue in evaluating this criterion is not the existence of the
problem, but rather the individual’s failure to abstain from using the substance despite the
difficulty it is causing.
Pharmacological criteria are the final grouping (Criteria 10 and 11). Tolerance (Criterion 10)
is signaled by requiring a markedly increased dose of the substance to achieve the desired effect
or a markedly reduced effect when the usual dose is consumed. The degree to which tolerance
develops varies greatly across different individuals as well as across substances and may involve
a variety of central nervous system effects. For example, tolerance to respiratory depression and
tolerance to sedating and motor coordination may develop at different rates, depending on the
substance. Tolerance may be difficult to determine by history alone, and laboratory tests may be
helpful (e.g., high blood levels of the substance coupled with little evidence of intoxication
suggest that tolerance is likely). Tolerance must also be distinguished from individual variability
in the initial sensitivity to the effects of particular substances. For example, some first-time
alcohol drinkers show very little evidence of intoxication with three or four drinks, whereas
others of similar weight and drinking histories have slurred speech and incoordination.
Withdrawal (Criterion 11) is a syndrome that occurs when blood or tissue concentrations of a
substance decline in an individual who had maintained prolonged, heavy use of the substance.
After developing withdrawal symptoms, the individual is likely to consume the substance to
relieve the symptoms. Withdrawal symptoms vary greatly across the classes of substances, and
separate criteria sets for withdrawal are provided for the drug classes. Marked and generally
easily measured physiological signs of withdrawal are common with alcohol, opioids, and
sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics. Withdrawal signs and symptoms with stimulants
(amphetamine-type substances, cocaine, other or unspecified stimulants), as well as tobacco and
cannabis, are often present but may be less apparent. Significant withdrawal has not been
documented in humans after repeated use of phencyclidine, other hallucinogens, and inhalants;
therefore, this criterion is not included for these substances. Neither tolerance nor withdrawal is
