necessary for a diagnosis of a substance use disorder. However, for most classes of substances, a
past history of withdrawal is associated with a
547
more severe clinical course (i.e., an earlier onset of a substance use disorder, higher levels of
substance intake, and a greater number of substance-related problems).
Symptoms of tolerance and withdrawal occurring during appropriate use of prescribed
medications given as part of medical treatment (e.g., opioid analgesics, sedatives, stimulants) are
specifically not counted when diagnosing a substance use disorder. The appearance of normal,
expected pharmacological tolerance and withdrawal during the course of medical treatment has
been known to lead to an erroneous diagnosis of “addiction” even when these were the only
symptoms present. Individuals whose only symptoms are those that occur as a result of medical
treatment (i.e., tolerance and withdrawal as part of medical care when the medications are taken
as prescribed) should not receive a diagnosis solely on the basis of these symptoms. However,
prescription medications can be used inappropriately, and a substance use disorder can be
correctly diagnosed when there are other symptoms of compulsive, drug-seeking behavior.
Severity and Specifiers
Substance use disorders occur in a broad range of severity, from mild to severe, with severity
based on the number of symptom criteria endorsed. As a general estimate of severity, a mild
substance use disorder is suggested by the presence of two to three symptoms, moderate by four
to five symptoms, and severe by six or more symptoms. Changing severity across time is also
reflected by reductions or increases in the frequency and/or dose of substance use, as assessed by
the individual’s own report, report of knowledgeable others, clinician’s observations, and
biological testing. The following course specifiers and descriptive features specifiers are also
available for substance use disorders: “in early remission,” “in sustained remission,” “on
maintenance therapy,” and “in a controlled environment.” Definitions of each are provided
within respective criteria sets.
Recording Procedures
The clinician should use the code that applies to the substance class but record the name of the
specific substance. For example, the clinician should record F13.20 moderate alprazolam use
disorder (rather than moderate sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder) or F15.10 mild
methamphetamine use disorder (rather than mild amphetamine-type substance use disorder). For
substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., anabolic steroids), the ICD-10-CM code
for other (or unknown) substance use disorder should be used and the specific substance
indicated (e.g., F19.10 mild anabolic steroid use disorder). If the substance taken by the
individual is unknown, the same ICD-10-CM code (i.e., for “other [or unknown] substance use
disorder”) should be used (e.g., F19.20 severe unknown substance use disorder). If criteria are
met for more than one substance use disorder, each should be diagnosed (e.g., F11.20 severe
heroin use disorder; F14.20 moderate cocaine use disorder).
The appropriate ICD-10-CM code for a substance use disorder depends on whether there is a
