comorbid substance-induced disorder (including substance intoxication and substance
withdrawal). In the first example in the paragraph above, the diagnostic code for moderate
alprazolam use disorder, F13.20, reflects the absence of a comorbid alprazolam-induced mental
disorder. Because ICD-10-CM codes for substance-induced disorders indicate both the presence
(or absence) and the severity of the substance use disorder, ICD-10-CM codes for substance use
disorders can be used only in the absence of a substance-induced disorder. See the individual
substance-specific sections for additional coding information.
548
Substance-Induced Disorders
The overall category of substance-induced disorders includes substance intoxication, substance
withdrawal, and substance/medication-induced mental disorders (e.g., substance-induced
psychotic disorder, substance-induced depressive disorder). While substance intoxication and
substance withdrawal are recognized as mental disorders, for purposes of clarity of reference in
discussions across this chapter, the term substance/medication-induced mental disorder (e.g.,
alcohol-induced depressive disorder, methamphetamine-induced anxiety disorder) is used to
distinguish these disorders from substance intoxication and substance withdrawal.
Substance Intoxication and Substance Withdrawal
Criteria for the substance-specific intoxication syndromes are included within the substance-
specific sections of this chapter. The essential feature is the development of a reversible
substance-specific syndrome due to the recent ingestion of a substance (Criterion A). The
clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes associated with
intoxication (e.g., belligerence, mood lability, impaired judgment) are attributable to the
physiological effects of the substance on the central nervous system (CNS) and develop during
or shortly after use of the substance (Criterion B) and are accompanied by substance-specific
signs and symptoms (Criterion C). The symptoms are not attributable to another medical
condition and are not better explained by another mental disorder (Criterion D). Substance
intoxication is common among individuals with a substance use disorder but also occurs
frequently in persons who use substances but do not have a substance use disorder. This category
does not apply to tobacco.
The most common changes in substance intoxication involve disturbances of perception,
wakefulness, attention, thinking, judgment, psychomotor behavior, and interpersonal behavior.
Short-term, or “acute,” substance intoxications may have different signs and symptoms from
sustained, or “chronic,” substance intoxications. For example, moderate cocaine doses may
initially produce gregariousness, but social withdrawal may develop if such doses are frequently
repeated over days or weeks.
When used in the physiological sense, the term intoxication is broader than the diagnosis of
substance intoxication as defined in this manual. Many substances may produce physiological or
psychological changes that are not necessarily problematic. For example, an individual with
tachycardia from substance use is experiencing a physiological effect from the substance, but if
