this is the only symptom in the absence of problematic behavior, the diagnosis of substance
intoxication would not apply. Intoxication may sometimes persist beyond the time when the
substance is detectable in the body. This may be attributable to enduring CNS effects, from
which the recovery takes longer than the time for elimination of the substance. These longer-term
effects of intoxication must be distinguished from withdrawal (i.e., symptoms initiated by a
decline in blood or tissue concentrations of a substance).
Criteria for substance withdrawal are also included within the substance-specific sections of
this chapter. The essential feature is the development of a substance-specific problematic
behavioral change, with physiological and cognitive concomitants, that is due to the cessation of,
or reduction in, heavy and prolonged substance use (Criterion A). The substance-specific
syndrome (Criterion B) causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms are not due to
another medical condition and are not better explained by another mental disorder (Criterion D).
Withdrawal is usually, but not always, associated with a substance use disorder. Also, it is
important to emphasize that symptoms of withdrawal occurring during appropriate use of
medications given as part of medical treatment with
549
prescribed medications (e.g., opioid analgesics, sedatives, stimulants) are specifically not
counted when diagnosing a substance use disorder. Most individuals with withdrawal have an
urge to readminister the substance to reduce the symptoms.
Route of Administration and Speed of Substance Effects
Routes of administration that produce more rapid and efficient absorption into the bloodstream
(e.g., intravenous, smoking, intranasal “snorting”) tend to result in a more intense intoxication
and an increased likelihood of an escalating pattern of substance use leading to withdrawal.
Similarly, rapidly acting substances are more likely than slower-acting substances to produce
immediate intoxication.
Duration of Effects
Within the same drug category, relatively short-acting substances tend to have a higher potential
for the development of withdrawal than do those with a longer duration of action. However,
longer-acting substances tend to have longer duration of withdrawal symptoms. The half-life of
the substance parallels aspects of withdrawal: the longer the duration of action, the longer the
time between cessation and the onset of withdrawal symptoms and the longer the withdrawal
duration. In general, the longer the acute withdrawal period, the less intense the syndrome tends
to be.
Use of Multiple Substances
Substance intoxication and withdrawal often involve several substances used simultaneously or
sequentially. In these cases, each diagnosis should be recorded separately.
Associated Laboratory Findings
