Laboratory analyses of blood and urine samples can help determine recent use and the specific
substances involved. However, a positive laboratory test result does not by itself indicate that the
individual has a pattern of substance use that meets criteria for a substance-induced or substance
use disorder, and a negative test result does not by itself rule out a diagnosis.
Laboratory tests can be useful in identifying withdrawal. If the individual presents with
withdrawal from an unknown substance, laboratory tests may help identify the substance and
may also be helpful in differentiating withdrawal from other mental disorders. In addition,
normal functioning in the presence of high blood levels of a substance suggests considerable
tolerance.
Development and Course
Individuals ages 18–24 years have relatively high prevalence rates for the use of virtually every
substance. Intoxication is usually the initial substance-related disorder and often begins in the
teens. Withdrawal can occur at any age as long as the relevant drug has been taken in sufficient
doses over an extended period of time.
Recording Procedures for Substance Intoxication and Substance
Withdrawal
The clinician should use the code that applies to the class of substances but record the name of
the specific substance. For example, the clinician should record F13.230 secobarbital withdrawal
(rather than sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal) or F15.120 methamphetamine
intoxication (rather than amphetamine-type substance intoxication). Note that
550
the appropriate ICD-10-CM diagnostic codes for substance intoxication and substance
withdrawal depend on whether there is a comorbid substance use disorder. In this case, the
F15.120 code for methamphetamine intoxication indicates the presence of a comorbid mild
methamphetamine use disorder. If there had been no comorbid methamphetamine use disorder
(and no perceptual disturbances), the diagnostic code would have been F15.920. See the coding
note for the substance-specific intoxication and withdrawal syndromes for the actual coding
options.
For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., anabolic steroids), the ICD-10-CM
code for other (or unknown) substance intoxication or other (or unknown) substance withdrawal
should be used and the specific substance indicated (e.g., F19.920 anabolic steroid intoxication).
If the substance taken by the individual is unknown, the same code (i.e., for the class “other [or
unknown] substance”) should be used (e.g., F19.920 unknown substance intoxication). If there
are symptoms or problems associated with a particular substance but criteria are not met for any
of the substance-specific disorders, the unspecified category can be used (e.g., F12.99
unspecified cannabis-related disorder).
As noted above, the substance-related codes in ICD-10-CM combine the substance use
disorder aspect of the clinical picture and the substance-induced aspect into a single combined
code. Thus, if both heroin withdrawal and moderate heroin use disorder are present, the single
code F11.23 for heroin withdrawal is given to cover both presentations. See the individual
