substance-specific sections for additional coding information.
Substance/Medication-Induced Mental Disorders
The substance/medication-induced mental disorders are potentially severe, usually temporary,
but sometimes persisting CNS syndromes that develop in the context of the effects of substances
of abuse, medications, and some toxins. They are distinguished from the substance use disorders,
in which a cluster of cognitive, behavioral, and physiological symptoms contribute to the
continued use of a substance despite significant substance-related problems. The
substance/medication-induced mental disorders may be induced by any of the 10 classes of
substances that produce substance use disorders, or by a great variety of other medications used
in medical treatment. Each substance/medication-induced mental disorder is described in the
relevant chapter (e.g., substance/medication-induced depressive disorder is located in
“Depressive Disorders”), and therefore, only a brief description is offered here. All
substance/medication-induced disorders share common characteristics. It is important to
recognize these common features to aid in the detection of these disorders. These features are
described as follows:
A. A clinically significant presentation of symptoms characteristic of disorders in the relevant
diagnostic class predominates in the clinical picture.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of both of
the following:
1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance intoxication,
substance withdrawal, or exposure to or withdrawal from a medication; and
2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in Criterion A.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by an independent mental disorder (i.e., one that is
not substance- or medication-induced). Such evidence of an independent mental disorder
could include the following:
1. The disturbance preceded the onset of severe intoxication or withdrawal or exposure to the
medication; or
2. The disturbance persisted for a substantial period of time (e.g., at least 1 month) after the
cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication or taking the
551
medication. This criterion does not apply to substance-induced neurocognitive disorders
or hallucinogen persisting perception disorder, which persist beyond the cessation of acute
intoxication or withdrawal.
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational,
or other important areas of functioning.
Diagnostic and Associated Features
