Some generalizations can be made regarding the categories of substances capable of producing
clinically relevant substance-induced mental disorders. In general, the more sedating drugs
(sedative, hypnotics, or anxiolytics, and alcohol) can produce prominent and clinically
significant depressive disorders during intoxication, while anxiety conditions are likely to be
observed during withdrawal syndromes from these substances. Also, during intoxication, the
more stimulating substances (e.g., amphetamines and cocaine) are likely to be associated with
substance-induced psychotic disorders and substance-induced anxiety disorders, and with
substance-induced major depressive episodes observed during withdrawal. Both the more
sedating and the more stimulating drugs are likely to produce significant but temporary sleep and
sexual disturbances. An overview of the relationship between specific categories of substances
and specific psychiatric syndromes is presented in Table 1.
The medication-induced conditions include what are often idiosyncratic CNS reactions or
relatively extreme examples of side effects for a wide range of medications taken for a variety of
medical concerns. These include neurocognitive complications of anesthetics, antihistamines,
antihypertensives, and a variety of other medications and toxins (e.g., organophosphates,
insecticides, carbon monoxide), as described in the chapter on neurocognitive disorders.
Psychotic syndromes may be temporarily experienced in the context of anticholinergic,
cardiovascular, and steroid drugs, as well as during use of stimulant-like and depressant-like
prescription or over-the-counter drugs. Temporary but severe mood disturbances can be observed
with a wide range of medications, including steroids, antihypertensives, disulfiram, and any
prescription or over-the-counter depressant or stimulant-like substances. A similar range of
medications can be associated with temporary anxiety syndromes, sexual dysfunctions, and
conditions of disturbed sleep.
In general, to be considered a substance/medication-induced mental disorder, there must be
evidence that the symptoms being observed are not likely to be better explained by an
independent mental disorder. The latter is more likely to be the case if the symptoms were
present before the severe intoxication or withdrawal or medication administration, or, with the
exception of several substance-induced persisting disorders listed in 1, continued more than 1
month after cessation of acute withdrawal, severe intoxication, or use of the medications. When
symptoms are only observed during a substance-induced delirium (e.g., alcohol withdrawal
delirium), only the delirium should be diagnosed, and other psychiatric symptoms occurring
during the delirium should not also be diagnosed separately, as many of these symptoms (e.g.,
disturbances in mood, anxiety, reality testing) are commonly seen during agitated, confused
states. The features associated with each relevant major mental disorder are similar whether
observed with independent or substance/medication-induced mental disorders. However,
individuals with substance/medication-induced mental disorders are likely to also demonstrate
the associated features seen with the specific category of substance or medication, as listed in
other subsections of this chapter.
Development and Course
Substance-induced mental disorders develop in the context of intoxication with or withdrawal
from substances of abuse, whereas medication-induced mental disorders can be seen with
prescribed or over-the-counter medications that are taken at the suggested doses.
