552
Both conditions are usually temporary and likely to disappear within 1 month or so of cessation
of acute withdrawal, severe intoxication, or use of the medication. Exceptions to these
generalizations occur for certain long-duration substance-induced disorders: substance-associated
neurocognitive disorders that relate to conditions such as alcohol-induced neurocognitive
disorder, inhalant-induced neurocognitive disorder, and sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-
induced neurocognitive disorder; and hallucinogen persisting perception disorder (“flashbacks”;
see the section “Hallucinogen-Related Disorders” later in this chapter). However, most
substance/medication-induced mental disorders, regardless of the severity of the symptoms, are
likely to improve relatively quickly with abstinence and unlikely to remain clinically relevant for
more than 1 month after complete cessation of use.
As is true of many consequences of heavy substance use, some individuals are more and
others less prone toward developing specific substance-induced disorders. Similar types of
predispositions may make some individuals more likely to develop psychiatric side effects of
some types of medications, but not others. However, it is unclear whether individuals with
family histories or personal prior histories of independent psychiatric syndromes are more likely
to develop the induced syndrome once the consideration is made as to whether the quantity and
frequency of the substance were sufficient to lead to the development of a substance-induced
syndrome.
There are indications that the intake of substances of abuse or some medications with
psychiatric side effects in the context of a preexisting mental disorder is likely to result in an
intensification of the symptoms of the preexisting mental disorder. The risk for
substance/medication-induced mental disorders is likely to increase with both the quantity and
the frequency of consumption of the relevant substance.
The symptom profiles for the substance/medication-induced mental disorders resemble
independent mental disorders. While the symptoms of substance/medication-induced mental
disorders can be identical to those of independent mental disorders (e.g., delusions,
hallucinations, psychoses, major depressive episodes, anxiety syndromes), and although they can
have the same severe consequences (e.g., suicide), most induced mental disorders are likely to
improve in a matter of days to weeks of abstinence.
The substance/medication-induced mental disorders are an important part of the differential
diagnoses for the independent psychiatric conditions. The importance of recognizing an induced
mental disorder is similar to the relevance of identifying the possible role of some medical
conditions and medication reactions before diagnosing an independent mental disorder.
Symptoms of substance- and medication-induced mental disorders may be identical cross-
sectionally to those of independent mental disorders but have different treatments and prognoses
from the independent condition.
Functional Consequences of Substance/Medication-Induced Mental
Disorders
The same consequences related to the relevant independent mental disorder (e.g., suicide
attempts) are likely to apply to the substance/medication-induced mental disorders, but these are
likely to disappear within 1 month after abstinence. Similarly, the same functional consequences
