distress, as manifested by at least two of the following, occurring within a 12-
month period:
1. Alcohol is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was
intended.
2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control
alcohol use.
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain alcohol, use
alcohol, or recover from its effects.
4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use alcohol.
5. Recurrent alcohol use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at
work, school, or home.
6. Continued alcohol use despite having persistent or recurrent social or
interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of alcohol.
7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
reduced because of alcohol use.
8. Recurrent alcohol use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.
554
9. Alcohol use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or
recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused
or exacerbated by alcohol.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of alcohol to achieve intoxication
or desired effect.
b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
alcohol.
11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for alcohol (refer to Criteria A and
B of the criteria set for alcohol withdrawal).
b. Alcohol (or a closely related substance, such as a benzodiazepine) is
taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms.
Specify if:
In early remission: After full criteria for alcohol use disorder were previously
met, none of the criteria for alcohol use disorder have been met for at least 3
months but for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4,
“Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use alcohol,” may be met).
In sustained remission: After full criteria for alcohol use disorder were
previously met, none of the criteria for alcohol use disorder have been met at
any time during a period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion
A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use alcohol,” may be met).
