Specify if:
In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
in an environment where access to alcohol is restricted.
Code based on current severity/remission: If an alcohol intoxication, alcohol
withdrawal, or another alcohol-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use
the codes below for alcohol use disorder. Instead, the comorbid alcohol use disorder
is indicated in the 4th character of the alcohol-induced disorder code (see the coding
note for alcohol intoxication, alcohol withdrawal, or a specific alcohol-induced mental
disorder). For example, if there is comorbid alcohol intoxication and alcohol use
disorder, only the alcohol intoxication code is given, with the 4th character indicating
whether the comorbid alcohol use disorder is mild, moderate, or severe: F10.129 for
mild alcohol use disorder with alcohol intoxication or F10.229 for a moderate or
severe alcohol use disorder with alcohol intoxication.
Specify current severity/remission:
F10.10 Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
F10.11 Mild, In early remission
F10.11 Mild, In sustained remission
F10.20 Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
F10.21 Moderate, In early remission
F10.21 Moderate, In sustained remission
F10.20 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
F10.21 Severe, In early remission
F10.21 Severe, In sustained remission
555
Specifiers
“In a controlled environment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is both
in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled environment
or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these environments are
closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.
Severity of the disorder is based on the number of diagnostic criteria endorsed. For a given
individual, changes in severity of alcohol use disorder across time are also reflected by
reductions in the frequency (e.g., days of use per month) or dose (e.g., number of standard drinks
consumed per day) of alcohol used, as assessed by the individual’s self-report, report of
knowledgeable others, clinician observations, and, when practical, biological testing (e.g.,
elevations in blood tests as described in the section “Diagnostic Markers” for this disorder).
Diagnostic Features
Alcohol use disorder is defined by a cluster of behavioral and physical symptoms, such as
withdrawal, tolerance, and craving. Alcohol withdrawal is characterized by withdrawal
