symptoms that develop approximately 4–12 hours after the reduction of intake following
prolonged, heavy alcohol ingestion. Because withdrawal from alcohol can be unpleasant and
intense, individuals may continue to consume alcohol despite adverse consequences, often to
avoid or to relieve withdrawal symptoms. Some withdrawal symptoms (e.g., sleep problems) can
persist at lower intensities for months and can contribute to relapse. Once a pattern of repetitive
and intense use develops, individuals with alcohol use disorder may devote substantial periods of
their time to obtaining and consuming alcoholic beverages.
Craving for alcohol is indicated by a strong desire to drink that makes it difficult to think of
anything else and that often results in the onset of drinking. School and job performance may
also suffer either from the aftereffects of drinking or from actual intoxication at school or on the
job; child care or household responsibilities may be neglected; and alcohol-related absences may
occur from school or work. The individual may use alcohol in physically hazardous
circumstances (e.g., driving an automobile, swimming, operating machinery while intoxicated).
Finally, individuals with an alcohol use disorder may continue to consume alcohol despite the
knowledge that continued consumption poses significant physical (e.g., blackouts, liver disease),
psychological (e.g., depression), social, or interpersonal problems (e.g., violent arguments with
spouse while intoxicated, child abuse).
Associated Features
Alcohol use disorder is often associated with problems similar to those associated with other
substances (e.g., cannabis; cocaine; heroin; amphetamines; sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics).
Alcohol may be used to alleviate the unwanted effects of these other substances or to substitute
for them when they are not available. Symptoms of conduct problems, depression, anxiety, and
insomnia frequently accompany heavy drinking and sometimes precede it.
Repeated intake of high doses of alcohol can affect nearly every organ system, especially the
gastrointestinal tract, cardiovascular system, and the central and peripheral nervous systems.
Gastrointestinal effects include gastritis, stomach or duodenal ulcers, and, in about 15% of
individuals who use alcohol heavily, liver cirrhosis and/or pancreatitis. There is also an increased
rate of cancer of the esophagus, stomach, and other parts of the gastrointestinal tract. One of the
most commonly associated conditions is low-grade hypertension. Cardiomyopathy and other
myopathies are less common but occur at an increased rate among those who drink very heavily.
These factors, along with marked
556
increases in levels of triglycerides and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, contribute to an
elevated risk of heart disease. Peripheral neuropathy may be evidenced by muscular weakness,
paresthesias, and decreased peripheral sensation. More persistent central nervous system effects
include cognitive deficits, such as severe memory impairment and degenerative changes in the
cerebellum. These effects are related to the direct effects of alcohol, trauma, or vitamin
deficiencies (particularly of the B vitamins, including thiamine). One devastating central nervous
system effect is the relatively rare alcohol-induced persisting amnestic disorder, or Wernicke-
Korsakoff syndrome, in which the ability to encode new memory is severely impaired. This
condition would now be described within the chapter “Neurocognitive Disorders” and would be
