termed a substance/medication-induced neurocognitive disorder.
Alcohol use disorder is an important contributor to suicide risk during severe intoxication
and in the context of a temporary alcohol-induced depressive or bipolar disorder. There is an
increased rate of suicidal behavior as well as of suicide among individuals with the disorder.
Prevalence
Alcohol use disorder is common. In the United States, lifetime prevalence rates of DSM-5
alcohol use disorder among adults were estimated to be 29.1% overall with severity specified as
follows: 8.6% mild, 6.6% moderate, and 13.9% severe. Among Australian adults, the estimated
lifetime prevalence of DSM-5 alcohol use disorder was 31.0%.
Rates of disorder vary by gender and age. In the United States, rates were greater among men
(36.0% lifetime prevalence) than among women (22.7%). Twelve-month prevalence of DSM-IV
alcohol use disorders in the United States was 4.6% among individuals ages 12–17 years, 16.2%
among individuals ages 18–29 years, and 1.5% among individuals 65 years and older.
Twelve-month prevalence of alcohol use disorders varies across U.S. ethnoracial groups as
well. For individuals ages 12–17 years, prevalence of DSM-IV alcohol use disorders was
greatest among Native Americans (2.8%) and non-Latinx Whites (2.2%), relative to Asian
Americans (1.6%), individuals reporting two or more racialized backgrounds (1.6%), Hispanics
(1.5%), and African Americans (0.8%). Among adults, data from a large U.S. population-based
study indicated that the 12-month prevalence of DSM-5 alcohol use disorder was 14.4% in
African Americans, 14.0% in non-Hispanic Whites, 13.6% in Hispanics, and 10.6% in Asian
Americans and Pacific Islanders. Data from a large community-based survey of Native
Americans from Southwestern and Northern Plains tribal nations showed that the 12-month
prevalence of DSM-IV alcohol abuse and dependence ranged from 4.1% to 9.8%. There is
extensive diversity in the rates and patterns of alcohol abuse and dependence across the more
than 570 American Indian and Alaska Native communities in the United States, as well as high
rates of abstinence from alcohol use in some of these communities. Historical experiences of
dispossession and subjugation and ongoing discrimination have been associated with increased
risk of symptom onset. Given the diversity of tribal communities, prevalence estimates for
alcohol use disorder among Native Americans should be interpreted with caution.
Development and Course
The first episode of alcohol intoxication is likely to occur during the mid-teens. Alcohol-related
problems that do not meet full criteria for a use disorder or isolated problems may occur before
age 20 years, but the age at onset of an alcohol use disorder with two or more of the criteria
clustered together peaks in the late teens or early to mid 20s. The large majority of individuals
who develop alcohol-related disorders do so by their late 30s. The first evidence of withdrawal is
not likely to appear until after many other aspects of an alcohol use disorder have developed. An
earlier onset of alcohol use disorder is observed in adolescents with preexisting conduct
problems and those with an earlier onset of intoxication.
557
Alcohol use disorder has a variable course that is characterized by periods of remission and
