Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
relapse. A decision to stop drinking, often in response to a crisis, is likely to be followed by a
period of weeks or more of abstinence, which is often followed by limited periods of controlled
or nonproblematic drinking. However, once alcohol intake resumes, it is highly likely that
consumption will rapidly escalate and that severe problems will once again develop.
Alcohol use disorder is often erroneously perceived as an intractable condition, perhaps
based on the fact that individuals who present for treatment typically have a history of many
years of severe alcohol-related problems. However, these most severe cases represent only a
minority of individuals with this disorder, and the typical individual with the disorder has a much
more promising prognosis.
Among adolescents, conduct disorder and repeated antisocial behavior often co-occur with
alcohol- and with other substance-related disorders. While most individuals with alcohol use
disorder develop the condition before age 40 years, perhaps 10% have later onset, as suggested
by a prospective study in California. Age-related physical changes in older individuals result in
increased brain susceptibility to the depressant effects of alcohol; decreased rates of liver
metabolism of a variety of substances, including alcohol; and decreased percentages of body
water. These changes can cause older people to develop more severe intoxication and subsequent
problems at lower levels of consumption. Alcohol-related problems in older people are also
especially likely to be associated with other medical complications.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental risk and prognostic factors may include poverty and
discrimination (including structural inequities such as differential incarceration rates and
differential access to medications for addiction treatment), unemployment and low levels of
education, cultural attitudes toward drinking and intoxication, the availability of alcohol
(including price), acquired personal experiences with alcohol, and stress levels. Additional
potential mediators of how alcohol problems develop in predisposed individuals include heavier
peer substance use, exaggerated positive expectations of the effects of alcohol, and suboptimal
ways of coping with stress.
Alcohol use disorder runs in families, with 40%–60% of the variance of
risk explained by genetic influences. The rate of this condition is three to four times higher in
close relatives of individuals with alcohol use disorder, with values highest for individuals with a
greater number of affected relatives, closer genetic relationships to the affected individual, and
higher severity of the alcohol-related problems in those relatives. A significantly higher rate of
alcohol use disorder exists in the monozygotic twin than in the dizygotic twin of an individual
with the condition. A three- to fourfold increase in risk has been observed in children of
individuals with alcohol use disorder, even when these children were given up for adoption at
birth and raised by adoptive parents who did not have the disorder.
Advances in understanding the genes that operate through intermediate characteristics (or
phenotypes) to affect the risk of alcohol use disorder can help to identify individuals who might
be at particularly low or high risk for alcohol use disorder. Among the low-risk phenotypes is the
acute alcohol-related skin flush (seen more commonly in persons of Asian descent). High
vulnerability is associated with preexisting schizophrenia or bipolar disorder, as well as
impulsivity (producing enhanced rates of all substance use disorders and gambling disorder), and
a high risk specifically for alcohol use disorder is associated with a low level of response (low
