Course modifiers.
sensitivity) to alcohol. A number of gene variations may account for low response to alcohol or
modulate the dopamine reward systems; however, any single gene variant is likely to explain
only 1%–2% of the risk for these disorders. Gene-environment interactions modulate the impact
of genetic variations; for
558
example, genetic effects on alcohol use are more pronounced when social constraints are
minimized (e.g., low parental monitoring) or when the environment permits easy access to
alcohol or encourages its use (e.g., high peer deviance).
In general, high levels of impulsivity are associated with an earlier onset and
more severe alcohol use disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
In most cultures, alcohol is the most frequently used intoxicating substance and contributes to
considerable morbidity and mortality. Globally, 2.8 million deaths were attributed to alcohol use,
which corresponds to 2.2% of total age-standardized deaths among women and 6.8% among
men. Globally, an estimated 237 million men and 46 million women have alcohol use disorder,
with the highest prevalence being among men and women in the European Region (14.8% and
3.5%) and the Region of the Americas (11.5% and 5.1%); in general, high-income countries have
the highest prevalence. Greater acculturation to U.S. society among immigrants is associated
with rising prevalence of alcohol use disorder, especially among women. Ethnic density (greater
proportion of people from the same background) may decrease the risk of alcohol use disorder
because of greater social support and buffering against the effects of discrimination. However,
neighborhood segregation may increase the risk for disorders because of the association with
other risk factors, such as higher concentration of alcohol advertising and retail outlets in low-
income areas.
Genetic polymorphisms for the alcohol-metabolizing enzymes alcohol dehydrogenase and
aldehyde dehydrogenase may affect the response to alcohol. When consuming alcohol,
individuals with certain polymorphisms can experience a flushed face and palpitations, reactions
that can be so severe as to limit or preclude future alcohol consumption and diminish the risk for
alcohol use disorder. For example, these gene variations are seen in as many as 40% of Japanese,
Chinese, and Korean individuals and are related to lower risks for the disorder. However, this
protective effect may be modulated by sociocultural factors, as shown by rising prevalence of
alcohol use disorder in Japan, China, and South Korea over the last decades associated with
increasing westernization and changing cultural attitudes about women’s drinking.
Despite small variations regarding individual criterion items, the diagnostic criteria perform
equally well across most race/ethnicity groups.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Men have higher rates of drinking and alcohol use disorder than women, although the gender gap
is narrowing as women are initiating alcohol use at a younger age. Because females generally
weigh less than males, have more fat and less water in their bodies, and metabolize less alcohol
in their esophagus and stomach, they are likely to develop higher blood alcohol levels per drink
