than males. Females who drink heavily may also be more vulnerable than males to some of the
physical consequences associated with alcohol, including alcohol-related blackouts and liver
disease. Additionally, while genetic-related mechanisms for alcohol risk overlap for males and
females, the specific environmental components that add to the risk may differ across sexes,
especially during adolescence. Drinking during pregnancy, which tends to decrease overall, may
be a sign of an alcohol use disorder.
Diagnostic Markers
Individuals whose heavier drinking places them at elevated risk for alcohol use disorder can be
identified both through standardized questionnaires and by elevations in blood test results likely
to be seen with regular heavier drinking. These measures do not establish a diagnosis of an
alcohol-related disorder but can be useful in highlighting individuals for
559
whom more information should be gathered. The most direct test available to measure alcohol
consumption cross-sectionally is blood alcohol concentration, which can also be used to judge
tolerance to alcohol. For example, an individual with a concentration of 150 mg of ethanol per
deciliter (dL) of blood who does not show signs of intoxication can be presumed to have
acquired at least some degree of tolerance to alcohol. At 200 mg/dL, most nontolerant
individuals demonstrate severe intoxication.
Regarding laboratory tests, one sensitive laboratory indicator of heavy drinking is a modest
elevation or high-normal levels (>35 units) of gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT). This may be
the only laboratory finding. At least 70% of individuals with a high GGT level are persistent
heavy drinkers (i.e., consuming eight or more drinks daily on a regular basis). A second test with
comparable or even higher levels of sensitivity and specificity is carbohydrate-deficient
transferrin (CDT), with levels of 20 units or higher useful in identifying individuals who
regularly consume eight or more drinks daily. Given that both GGT and CDT levels return
toward normal within days to weeks of stopping drinking, both state markers may be useful in
monitoring abstinence, especially when the clinician observes increases, rather than decreases, in
these values over time—a finding indicating that the individual is likely to have returned to
heavy drinking. The combination of tests for CDT and GGT may have even higher levels of
sensitivity and specificity than either test used alone. Additional useful tests include the mean
corpuscular volume (MCV), which may be elevated to high-normal values in individuals who
drink heavily—a change that is due to the direct toxic effects of alcohol on erythropoiesis.
Although the MCV can be used to help identify those who drink heavily, it is a poor method of
monitoring abstinence because of the long half-life of red blood cells. Liver function tests (e.g.,
alanine aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase) can reveal liver injury that is a consequence
of heavy drinking. Other potential markers of heavy drinking that are more nonspecific for
alcohol but can help the clinician think of the possible effects of alcohol include elevations in
blood levels or lipids (e.g., triglycerides and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol) and high-
normal levels of uric acid.
Additional diagnostic markers relate to signs and symptoms that reflect the consequences
often associated with persistent heavy drinking. For example, dyspepsia, nausea, and bloating
