can accompany gastritis, and hepatomegaly, esophageal varices, and hemorrhoids may reflect
alcohol-induced changes in the liver. Other physical signs of heavy drinking include tremor,
unsteady gait, insomnia, and erectile dysfunction. Males with chronic alcohol use disorder may
exhibit decreased testicular size and feminizing effects associated with reduced testosterone
levels. Repeated heavy drinking in females is associated with menstrual irregularities and, during
pregnancy, spontaneous abortion and fetal alcohol syndrome. Individuals with preexisting
histories of epilepsy or severe head trauma are more likely to develop alcohol-related seizures.
Alcohol withdrawal may be associated with nausea, vomiting, gastritis, hematemesis, dry mouth,
puffy blotchy complexion, and mild peripheral edema.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Most studies on suicidality and alcohol address alcohol consumption rather than alcohol use
disorder. However, a psychological autopsy study in Australia found that aggression, psychiatric
comorbidity, and recent interpersonal conflicts are suicide risk factors in individuals with alcohol
use disorder. A review of studies from 1999 through 2014 conducted in several countries,
including the United States, reported that both intoxication and chronic heavy alcohol use are
associated with suicide, extensive population-level data link alcohol with suicide, and there is
evidence suggesting that restrictive alcohol policies may help prevent suicide on a general
population level. A meta-analysis of studies conducted in the United States and several other
countries from 1996 through 2015 found that compared with nondrinking individuals, the acute
use of alcohol was associated with a nearly
560
sevenfold increase in risk of suicide attempt. Moreover, in this meta-analysis, as well as in U.S.-
based case-control crossover studies, heavier alcohol use within 24 hours was a much more
potent risk factor for suicide attempt than lower alcohol use. In a cohort of patients in
Mississippi, acute co-use of alcohol and sedatives had an even stronger association with suicide
attempt compared with alcohol use alone. A systematic review and meta-analysis of studies from
1975 through 2014 in several countries, including the United States, found that alcohol use is
associated with possession of firearms, that alcohol drinkers are four to six times more likely to
die by suicide with a gun than nondrinkers, and that heavy drinkers are more likely to choose
firearms over other suicide methods compared with nondrinkers.
Functional Consequences of Alcohol Use Disorder
The diagnostic features of alcohol use disorder highlight major areas of life functioning likely to
be impaired. These include driving and operating machinery, school and work, interpersonal
relationships and communication, and health. Alcohol-related disorders contribute to
absenteeism from work, job-related accidents, and low employee productivity. Rates are elevated
in homeless individuals, perhaps reflecting a downward spiral in social and occupational
functioning, although most individuals with alcohol use disorder continue to live with their
families and function within their jobs.
Alcohol use disorder is associated with a significant increase in the risk of accidents,
violence, and suicide. It is estimated that one in five intensive care unit admissions in some urban
