Nonpathological use of alcohol.
Alcohol intoxication, alcohol withdrawal, and alcohol-induced mental disorders.
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder.
Conduct disorder in childhood and antisocial personality disorder.
hospitals is related to alcohol and that 40% of individuals in the United States experience an
alcohol-related adverse event at some time in their lives, with alcohol accounting for up to 55%
of fatal driving events. Severe alcohol use disorder, especially in individuals with antisocial
personality disorder, is associated with the commission of criminal acts, including homicide.
Severe problematic alcohol use also contributes to disinhibition and feelings of sadness and
irritability, which contribute to suicide attempts and suicide.
Unanticipated alcohol withdrawal in hospitalized individuals for whom a diagnosis of
alcohol use disorder has been overlooked can add to the risks and costs of hospitalization and to
time spent in the hospital.
Differential Diagnosis
The key element of alcohol use disorder is the use of heavy doses
of alcohol with resulting repeated and significant distress or impaired functioning. While most
drinkers sometimes consume enough alcohol to feel intoxicated, only a minority (< 20%) ever
develop alcohol use disorder. Therefore, drinking, even daily, in low doses and occasional
intoxication do not by themselves make this diagnosis.
Alcohol use disorder is
differentiated from alcohol intoxication, alcohol withdrawal, and alcohol induced mental
disorders (e.g., alcohol-induced depressive disorder) in that alcohol use disorder describes a
problematic pattern of alcohol use that involves impaired control over alcohol use, social
impairment due to alcohol use, risky alcohol use (e.g., driving while intoxicated), and
pharmacological symptoms (the development of tolerance or withdrawal), whereas alcohol
intoxication, alcohol withdrawal, and alcohol-induced mental disorders describe psychiatric
syndromes that develop in the context of heavy use. Alcohol intoxication, alcohol withdrawal,
and alcohol-induced mental disorders occur frequently in individuals with alcohol use disorder.
In such cases, a diagnosis of alcohol intoxication, alcohol withdrawal, or an alcohol-induced
mental disorder should be given in addition to
561
a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder, the presence of which is indicated in the diagnostic code.
The signs and symptoms of alcohol use disorder are
similar to those seen in sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder. The two must be
distinguished, however, because the course may be different, especially in relation to medical
problems.
Alcohol use disorder, along with
other substance use disorders, is seen in the majority of individuals with antisocial personality
disorder and preexisting conduct disorder. Because these diagnoses are associated with an early
onset of alcohol use disorder as well as a worse prognosis, it is important to establish both
conditions.
Comorbidity
Bipolar disorders, schizophrenia, and antisocial personality disorder are associated with alcohol
