use disorder, and most anxiety and depressive disorders are associated with alcohol use disorder
as well. At least a part of the reported association between depression and moderate to severe
alcohol use disorder may be attributable to temporary, alcohol-induced comorbid depressive
symptoms resulting from the acute effects of intoxication or withdrawal, although this point has
long been debated. Severe, repeated alcohol intoxication may also suppress immune mechanisms
and predispose individuals to infections and increase the risk for cancers.
Alcohol Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recent ingestion of alcohol.
B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g.,
inappropriate sexual or aggressive behavior, mood lability, impaired judgment)
that developed during, or shortly after, alcohol ingestion.
C. One (or more) of the following signs or symptoms developing during, or shortly
after, alcohol use:
1. Slurred speech.
2. Incoordination.
3. Unsteady gait.
4. Nystagmus.
5. Impairment in attention or memory.
6. Stupor or coma.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with
another substance.
Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether there is a comorbid alcohol
use disorder. If a mild alcohol use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is
F10.120, and if a moderate or severe alcohol use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-
CM code is F10.220. If there is no comorbid alcohol use disorder, then the ICD-10-
CM code is F10.920.
562
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of alcohol intoxication is the presence of clinically significant and
sometimes life-threatening problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., inappropriate
sexual or aggressive behavior, mood lability, impaired judgment and decision-making,
difficulties with complex tasks such as driving, and impaired social or occupational functioning)
that develop during, or shortly after, alcohol ingestion (Criterion B). These changes are
