accompanied by evidence of impaired functioning and judgment and, if intoxication is intense,
can result in a life-threatening coma. The symptoms must not be attributable to another medical
condition (e.g., diabetic ketoacidosis), are not a reflection of conditions such as delirium, and are
not related to intoxication with other depressant drugs (e.g., benzodiazepines) (Criterion D). The
levels of incoordination can interfere with driving abilities and performance of usual activities to
the point of causing vehicle crashes or other events resulting in injury. Evidence of alcohol use
can be obtained by smelling alcohol on the individual’s breath, eliciting a history from the
individual or another observer, and, when needed, having the individual provide breath, blood, or
urine samples for toxicology analyses.
Associated Features
Signs and symptoms of intoxication are likely to be more intense when the blood alcohol level is
rising than when it is falling. The duration of intoxication depends on how much alcohol was
consumed over what period of time. In general, the body is able to metabolize approximately one
drink per hour, so that the blood alcohol level generally decreases at a rate of 15–20 mg/dL per
hour.
During even mild alcohol intoxication, different symptoms are likely to be observed at
different time points. Evidence of mild intoxication with alcohol can be seen in most individuals
after approximately two drinks (each standard drink is approximately 10–12 grams of ethanol
and raises the blood alcohol concentration approximately 20 mg/dL). Early in the drinking
period, when blood alcohol levels are rising, symptoms often reflect stimulation (e.g.,
talkativeness, a sensation of well-being, a bright, expansive mood). Later, especially when blood
alcohol levels are falling, the individual is likely to become progressively more depressed,
withdrawn, and cognitively impaired.
Alcohol intoxication is sometimes associated with amnesia for the events that occurred
during the course of the intoxication (“blackouts”). This phenomenon is related to a relatively
high blood alcohol level and, perhaps, to the rapidity with which this level is reached. Acute
alcohol intoxication may cause metabolic alterations (e.g., hypoglycemia, electrolyte
disturbances) and may have severe cardiovascular, respiratory, and/or gastrointestinal effects. At
very high blood alcohol levels (e.g., 200–300 mg/dL), an individual who has not developed
tolerance for alcohol is likely to fall asleep and enter a first stage of anesthesia. Higher blood
alcohol levels (e.g., in excess of 300–400 mg/dL) can cause inhibition of respiration and pulse
and even death in nontolerant individuals.
Alcohol intoxication is an important contributor to interpersonal violence and suicidal
behavior. Among individuals intoxicated by alcohol, there appears to be an increased rate of
accidental injury (including death due to behaviors associated with altered judgment, self-harm,
and violence), suicidal behavior, and suicide.
Prevalence
The large majority of alcohol consumers are likely to have been intoxicated to some degree at
some point in their lives. For example, in 2018, 43% of 12th-grade students in the United States
reported having “been drunk” at least once in their lifetime, and 17.5% of them reported that they
had gotten drunk at least once in the prior 30 days. Using a definition of intoxication of four or
more standard drinks on any day for women and five or more
