563
standard drinks on any day for men, the 12-month prevalence of high-risk drinking in U.S. adults
is 17.4% for Native Americans, 15.1% for African Americans, 13.5% for Latinx, 12.3% for non-
Latinx Whites, and 7.2% for Asians and Pacific Islanders.
Development and Course
Intoxication usually occurs as an episode developing over minutes to hours and typically lasting
several hours. In the United States, the average age at first intoxication is approximately 15
years, with the highest prevalence at approximately 18–25 years. Frequency and intensity usually
decrease with further advancing age. The earlier the onset of regular intoxication, the greater the
likelihood the individual will go on to develop alcohol use disorder.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental.
Episodes of alcohol intoxication increase with personality characteristics of sensation seeking
and impulsivity.
Environmental.
Episodes of alcohol intoxication increase with having heavy-drinking peers, holding beliefs that
heavy drinking is an important component of having fun, and using alcohol to cope with stress.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The major issues parallel the cultural differences regarding the use of alcohol overall. For
example, some college fraternities and sororities encourage alcohol intoxication. This condition
is also frequent on certain dates of cultural significance (e.g., New Year’s Eve) and, for some
subgroups, during specific events (e.g., wakes following funerals). Other subgroups encourage
drinking at religious celebrations (e.g., Jewish and Catholic holidays), while still others strongly
discourage all drinking or intoxication (e.g., some religious groups, such as Mormons,
fundamentalist Christians, and Muslims).
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Historically, in many Western societies, acceptance of drinking and drunkenness is more
tolerated for men, but such gender differences may be much less prominent in recent years,
especially during adolescence and young adulthood. In general, women are less tolerant of the
same amount of alcohol than men.
Diagnostic Markers
Intoxication is usually established by observing an individual’s behavior and smelling alcohol on
the breath. The degree of intoxication increases with an individual’s blood or breath alcohol level
and with the ingestion of other substances, especially those with sedating effects.
