Other medical conditions.
Alcohol-induced mental disorders.
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
A collaborative, international study in emergency departments in 17 countries found that acute
alcohol use, independent of chronic use, increases the risk of suicide attempt, with each drink
raising the risk by 30%. For more information, see “Association With Suicidal Thoughts or
Behavior” in the Alcohol Use Disorder section.
Functional Consequences of Alcohol Intoxication
Alcohol intoxication contributed to the more than 95,000 deaths and 2.8 million years of
potential life lost each year in the United States from 2011 through 2015, shortening the
564
lives of those who died by an average of 30 years. In addition, intoxication with this drug
contributes to huge costs associated with drunk driving and lost time from school or work, as
well as interpersonal arguments and physical fights.
Differential Diagnosis
Several medical (e.g., diabetic acidosis) and neurological conditions
(e.g., cerebellar ataxia, multiple sclerosis) can temporarily resemble alcohol intoxication.
Alcohol intoxication is distinguished from alcohol-induced
mental disorders (e.g., alcohol-induced depressive disorder, with onset during intoxication)
because the symptoms (e.g., depressed mood) in these latter disorders are in excess of those
usually associated with alcohol intoxication, predominate in the clinical presentation, and are
severe enough to warrant clinical attention.
Intoxication with sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
drugs or with other sedating substances (e.g., antihistamines, anticholinergic drugs) can be
mistaken for alcohol intoxication. The differential requires observing alcohol on the breath,
measuring blood or breath alcohol levels, ordering a medical workup, and gathering a good
history. The signs and symptoms of sedative-hypnotic intoxication are very similar to those
observed with alcohol and include similar problematic behavioral or psychological changes.
These changes are accompanied by evidence of impaired functioning and judgment—which, if
intense, can result in a life-threatening coma—and levels of incoordination that can interfere with
driving abilities and with performing usual activities. However, there is no smell as there is with
alcohol, but there is likely to be evidence of misuse of the depressant drug in the blood or urine
toxicology analyses.
Comorbidity
Alcohol intoxication may occur comorbidly with other substance intoxication, especially in
individuals with conduct disorder or antisocial personality disorder. Given the typical overlap of
alcohol intoxication with alcohol use disorder, see “Comorbidity” under Alcohol Use Disorder
for more details about co-occurring conditions that are likely to be encountered.
