When hallucinations occur in the absence of delirium (i.e., in a clear sensorium), a diagnosis of
substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder should be considered.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of alcohol withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal
syndrome that develops within several hours to a few days after the cessation of (or reduction in)
heavy and prolonged alcohol use (Criteria A and B). The withdrawal syndrome includes two or
more of the symptoms reflecting autonomic hyperactivity and anxiety listed in Criterion B, along
with gastrointestinal symptoms.
Withdrawal symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms must not be
attributable to another medical condition and are not better explained by another mental disorder
(e.g., generalized anxiety disorder), including intoxication or withdrawal from another substance
(e.g., sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal) (Criterion D).
Symptoms can be relieved by administering alcohol or benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam). The
withdrawal symptoms typically begin when blood concentrations of alcohol decline sharply (i.e.,
within 4–12 hours) after alcohol use has been stopped or reduced. Reflecting the relatively fast
metabolism of alcohol, symptoms of alcohol withdrawal usually peak in intensity during the
second day of abstinence and are likely to improve markedly by the fourth or fifth day.
Following acute withdrawal, however, symptoms of anxiety, insomnia, and autonomic
dysfunction may persist for up to 3–6 months at lower levels of intensity.
Fewer than 10% of individuals who develop alcohol withdrawal will ever develop dramatic
symptoms (e.g., severe autonomic hyperactivity, tremors, alcohol withdrawal delirium). Tonic-
clonic seizures occur in fewer than 3% of individuals.
Associated Features
Although confusion and changes in consciousness are not core criteria for alcohol withdrawal,
alcohol withdrawal delirium (see “Delirium” in the chapter “Neurocognitive Disorders”) may
occur in the context of withdrawal. As is true for any agitated, confused state, regardless of the
cause, in addition to a disturbance of consciousness and cognition, withdrawal delirium can
include visual, tactile, or (rarely) auditory hallucinations
566
(delirium tremens). When alcohol withdrawal delirium develops, it is likely that a clinically
relevant medical condition may be present (e.g., liver failure, pneumonia, gastrointestinal
bleeding, sequelae of head trauma, hypoglycemia, an electrolyte imbalance, postoperative
status).
Prevalence
It is estimated that approximately 50% of middle-class, highly functional individuals with
alcohol use disorder in the United States have ever experienced a full alcohol withdrawal
syndrome. Among individuals with alcohol use disorder who are hospitalized or homeless, the
rate of alcohol withdrawal may be greater than 80%. Less than 10% of individuals in withdrawal
