Environmental.
Other medical conditions.
ever demonstrate alcohol withdrawal delirium or withdrawal seizures. The prevalence of alcohol
withdrawal symptoms does not seem to vary across U.S. ethnoracial groups.
Development and Course
Acute alcohol withdrawal occurs as an episode usually lasting 4–5 days and only after extended
periods of heavy drinking. Withdrawal is relatively rare in individuals younger than 30 years,
and the risk and severity increase with increasing age.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Alcohol withdrawal is more likely to occur with heavier alcohol intake, and that might be most
often observed in individuals with conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder.
Withdrawal states are also more severe in individuals who are also dependent on other
depressant drugs (sedative-hypnotics) and individuals who have had more alcohol withdrawal
experiences in the past. Predictors of severe alcohol withdrawal include alcohol withdrawal
delirium, prior histories of severe withdrawal syndromes, low blood potassium levels, decreased
platelet counts, and systolic hypertension.
The probability of developing alcohol withdrawal increases with the quantity and
frequency of alcohol consumption. Most individuals with this condition are drinking daily,
consuming large amounts (approximately more than eight drinks per day) for multiple days.
However, there are large inter-individual differences, with enhanced risks for individuals with
concurrent medical conditions, those with family histories of alcohol withdrawal (i.e., a genetic
component), those with prior withdrawals, and individuals who consume sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic drugs.
Diagnostic Markers
Autonomic hyperactivity in the context of moderately high but falling blood alcohol levels and a
history of prolonged, heavy drinking indicate a likelihood of alcohol withdrawal.
Functional Consequences of Alcohol Withdrawal
Symptoms of withdrawal may serve to perpetuate drinking behaviors and contribute to relapse,
resulting in persistently impaired social and occupational functioning. Symptoms requiring
medically supervised detoxification result in hospital utilization and loss of work productivity.
Overall, the presence of withdrawal is associated with greater functional impairment and poor
prognosis among individuals with alcohol use disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
The symptoms of alcohol withdrawal can also be mimicked by some
medical conditions (e.g., hypoglycemia and diabetic ketoacidosis). Essential tremor,
567
a disorder that frequently runs in families, may erroneously suggest the tremulousness associated
with alcohol withdrawal.
