Alcohol-induced mental disorders.
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal.
Alcohol withdrawal is distinguished from alcohol-induced
mental disorders (e.g., alcohol-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during withdrawal) because
the symptoms (e.g., anxiety) in these latter disorders are in excess of those usually associated
with alcohol withdrawal, predominate in the clinical presentation, and are severe enough to
warrant clinical attention.
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal produces a
syndrome very similar to that of alcohol withdrawal.
Comorbidity
Given the typical overlap of alcohol withdrawal with alcohol use disorder, see “Comorbidity”
under Alcohol Use Disorder for more details about co-occurring conditions that are likely to be
encountered.
Alcohol-Induced Mental Disorders
The following alcohol-induced mental disorders are described in other chapters of the manual
with disorders with which they share phenomenology (see the substance/medication-induced
mental disorders in these chapters): alcohol-induced psychotic disorder (“Schizophrenia
Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders”); alcohol-induced bipolar and related disorder
(“Bipolar and Related Disorders”); alcohol-induced depressive disorder (“Depressive
Disorders”); alcohol-induced anxiety disorder (“Anxiety Disorders”); alcohol-induced sleep
disorder 
(“Sleep-Wake 
Disorders”); 
alcohol-induced 
sexual 
dysfunction 
(“Sexual
Dysfunctions”); and alcohol-induced major or mild neurocognitive disorder (“Neurocognitive
Disorders”). For alcohol intoxication delirium and alcohol withdrawal delirium, see the criteria
and discussion of delirium in the chapter “Neurocognitive Disorders.” These alcohol-induced
mental disorders are diagnosed instead of alcohol intoxication or alcohol withdrawal only when
the symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention.
Diagnostic and Associated Features
The symptom profiles for an alcohol-induced condition resemble the corresponding independent
mental disorders as described elsewhere in this manual. Moreover, while alcohol-induced
conditions can have the same severe consequences as independent mental disorders (e.g., suicide
attempts), they are likely to improve without formal treatment in a matter of days to weeks after
cessation of severe intoxication and/or withdrawal.
Each alcohol-induced mental disorder is listed in the relevant diagnostic section and therefore
only a brief description is offered here. These alcohol-induced mental disorders must have
developed in the context of severe alcohol intoxication and/or alcohol withdrawal.
Given that the presentation of an alcohol-induced mental disorder symptomatically resembles
the presentations of independent mental disorders from the same diagnostic class, they must be
differentiated based on the temporal relationship between the alcohol use and the psychiatric
symptoms. Individuals with alcohol-induced mental disorders are likely to also demonstrate the
associated features seen with an alcohol use disorder, as listed in that subsection.
There must be evidence that the disorder being observed is not likely to be better explained
