by an independent mental disorder. The latter is likely to occur if the mental
568
disorder was present before the severe intoxication or withdrawal, or continued for more than
1 month after the cessation of severe intoxication or withdrawal. When symptoms are observed
only during a delirium, they should be considered part of the delirium and not diagnosed
separately, as many symptoms (including disturbances in mood, anxiety, and reality testing) are
commonly seen during agitated, confused states. The alcohol-induced mental disorder must be
clinically relevant, causing significant distress or significant functional impairment. Finally, there
are indications that the intake of substances of abuse in the context of a preexisting mental
disorder are likely to result in an intensification of the preexisting independent syndrome.
Rates of alcohol-induced mental disorders vary somewhat by diagnostic category. For
example, the lifetime risk for major depressive episodes in individuals with alcohol use disorder
is approximately 40%, but only about one-third to one-half of these represent independent major
depressive syndromes observed outside the context of intoxication. Similar rates of alcohol-
induced sleep and anxiety disorders are likely, but alcohol-induced psychotic episodes are
estimated to be seen in less than 5% of individuals with alcohol use disorder.
Development and Course
Once present, the symptoms of an alcohol-induced mental disorder are likely to remain clinically
relevant as long as the individual continues to experience severe intoxication or withdrawal.
While the symptoms may be identical to those of independent mental disorders (e.g., psychoses,
major depressive disorder), and while they can have the same severe consequences (e.g., suicide
attempts), all alcohol-induced mental disorders other than alcohol-induced neurocognitive
disorder, amnestic confabulatory type (alcohol-induced persisting amnestic disorder), regardless
of the severity of the symptoms, are likely to improve relatively quickly and unlikely to remain
clinically relevant for more than 1 month after cessation of severe intoxication and/or
withdrawal.
The alcohol-induced mental disorders are an important part of the differential diagnoses for
the independent mental conditions. Independent schizophrenia, major depressive disorder,
bipolar disorder, and anxiety disorders, such as panic disorder, are likely to be associated with
much longer-lasting periods of symptoms and often require longer-term medications to optimize
the probability of improvement or recovery. The alcohol-induced mental disorders, on the other
hand, are likely to be much shorter in duration and disappear within several days to 1 month after
cessation of severe intoxication and/or withdrawal, even without psychotropic medications.
The importance of recognizing an alcohol-induced mental disorder is similar to the relevance
of identifying the possible role of some endocrine conditions and medication reactions before
diagnosing an independent mental disorder. In light of the high prevalence of alcohol use
disorders worldwide, it is important that these alcohol-induced diagnoses be considered before
independent mental disorders are diagnosed.
Unspecified Alcohol-Related Disorder
