C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with
another substance.
Diagnostic Features
Caffeine can be consumed from a number of different sources, including coffee, tea, caffeinated
soda, “energy” drinks, over-the-counter analgesics and cold remedies, weight-loss aids, and
chocolate. Caffeine is also increasingly being used as an additive to vitamins and to food
products. More than 85% of children and adults in the United States consume caffeine. Some
caffeine users display symptoms consistent with problematic use, including tolerance and
withdrawal (see “Caffeine Withdrawal” later in this chapter); the data are not available at this
time to determine the clinical significance of a caffeine use disorder and its prevalence. In
contrast, there is evidence that caffeine withdrawal and caffeine intoxication are clinically
significant and sufficiently prevalent.
The essential feature of caffeine intoxication is recent consumption of caffeine and five or
more signs or symptoms that develop during or shortly after caffeine use (Criteria A and B).
Symptoms include restlessness, nervousness, excitement, insomnia, flushed face, diuresis, and
gastrointestinal complaints, which can occur with low doses (e.g., 200 mg) in
570
vulnerable individuals such as children, the elderly, or individuals who have not been
exposed to caffeine previously. Symptoms that generally appear at levels of more than 1 g/day
include muscle twitching, rambling flow of thought and speech, tachycardia or cardiac
arrhythmia, periods of inexhaustibility, and psychomotor agitation. Caffeine intoxication may
not occur despite high caffeine intake because of the development of tolerance. The signs or
symptoms must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The signs or symptoms must not be
attributable to another medical condition and are not better explained by another mental disorder
(e.g., an anxiety disorder) or intoxication with another substance (Criterion D).
Associated Features
Mild sensory disturbances (e.g., ringing in the ears and flashes of light) may occur with high
doses of caffeine. Although large doses of caffeine can increase heart rate, typical dietary doses
can slow heart rate. Whether excess caffeine intake can cause headaches is unclear. On physical
examination, agitation, restlessness, sweating, tachycardia, flushed face, and increased bowel
motility may be seen. Caffeine blood levels may provide important information for diagnosis,
particularly when the individual is a poor historian, although these levels are not diagnostic by
themselves in view of the individual variation in response to caffeine.
Prevalence
