Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Independent mental disorders.
The prevalence of caffeine intoxication in the general population is unclear. In the United States,
approximately 7% of individuals in the population may experience five or more symptoms along
with functional impairment consistent with a diagnosis of caffeine intoxication.
Consumption of caffeinated energy drinks, often together with alcohol, leading to caffeine
intoxication, has increased among adolescents and young adults in high-income countries,
resulting in the doubling of U.S. emergency department visits related to caffeinated energy
drinks between 2007 and 2011.
Development and Course
Consistent with a half-life of caffeine of approximately 4–6 hours, caffeine intoxication
symptoms usually remit within the first day or so and do not have any known long-lasting
consequences. However, individuals who consume very high doses of caffeine (i.e., 5–10 g) may
require immediate medical attention, as such doses can be lethal.
With advancing age, individuals are likely to demonstrate increasingly intense reactions to
caffeine, with greater complaints of interference with sleep or feelings of hyperarousal. Caffeine
intoxication among young individuals after consumption of highly caffeinated products,
including energy drinks, has been observed. Children and adolescents may be at increased risk
for caffeine intoxication because of low body weight, lack of tolerance, and lack of knowledge
about the pharmacological effects of caffeine.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Caffeine intoxication is often seen among individuals who use caffeine less
frequently or in those who have recently increased their caffeine intake by a substantial amount.
Furthermore, oral contraceptives significantly decrease the elimination of caffeine and
consequently may increase the risk of intoxication.
Genetic factors may affect risk of caffeine intoxication.
571
Functional Consequences of Caffeine Intoxication
Impairment from caffeine intoxication may have serious consequences, including dysfunction at
work or school, social indiscretions, or failure to fulfill role obligations. Moreover, extremely
high doses of caffeine can be fatal. In some cases, caffeine intoxication may precipitate a
caffeine-induced disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Caffeine intoxication may be characterized by symptoms (e.g.,
panic attacks) that resemble independent mental disorders. To meet criteria for caffeine
intoxication, the symptoms must not be associated with another medical condition or another
mental disorder, such as an anxiety disorder, that could better explain them. Manic episodes;
panic disorder; generalized anxiety disorder; amphetamine intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic withdrawal or tobacco withdrawal; sleep disorders; and medication-induced side
effects (e.g., akathisia) can cause a clinical picture that is similar to that of caffeine intoxication.
