Caffeine-induced mental disorders.
F15.93
The temporal relationship of the symptoms to increased
caffeine use or to abstinence from caffeine helps to establish the diagnosis. Caffeine intoxication
is differentiated from caffeine-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during intoxication (see
“Substance/Medication-Induced Anxiety Disorder” in the chapter “Anxiety Disorders”), and
caffeine-induced sleep disorder, with onset during intoxication (see “Substance/Medication-
Induced Sleep Disorder” in the chapter “Sleep-Wake Disorders”), because the symptoms (e.g.,
anxiety and insomnia, respectively) in these latter disorders are in excess of those usually
associated with caffeine intoxication, predominate in the clinical presentation, and are severe
enough to warrant independent clinical attention.
Comorbidity
Typical dietary doses of caffeine have not been consistently associated with medical problems.
However, heavy use (e.g., > 400 mg) can cause or exacerbate anxiety and somatic symptoms and
gastrointestinal distress. With acute, extremely high doses of caffeine, grand mal seizures and
respiratory failure may result in death. Excessive caffeine use is associated with depressive
disorders, bipolar disorders, eating disorders, psychotic disorders, sleep disorders, and substance-
related disorders, whereas individuals with anxiety disorders are more likely to avoid caffeine.
Caffeine Withdrawal
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Prolonged daily use of caffeine.
B. Abrupt cessation of or reduction in caffeine use, followed within 24 hours by
three (or more) of the following signs or symptoms:
1. Headache.
2. Marked fatigue or drowsiness.
3. Dysphoric mood, depressed mood, or irritability.
4. Difficulty concentrating.
5. Flu-like symptoms (nausea, vomiting, or muscle pain/stiffness).
572
C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The signs or symptoms are not associated with the physiological effects of
another medical condition (e.g., migraine, viral illness) and are not better
explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication or withdrawal from
another substance.
