Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of caffeine withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal
syndrome that develops after the abrupt cessation of (or substantial reduction in) prolonged daily
caffeine ingestion (Criterion B). Because individuals may be unaware of the wide array of
sources of caffeine beyond coffee, colas, and energy drinks (e.g., over-the-counter analgesics and
cold remedies, weight loss aids, chocolate), they may not connect ingestion of these substances
with symptoms of caffeine withdrawal. The caffeine withdrawal syndrome is indicated by three
or more of the following (Criterion B): headache; marked fatigue or drowsiness; dysphoric
mood, depressed mood, or irritability; difficulty concentrating; and flu-like symptoms (nausea,
vomiting, or muscle pain/stiffness). The withdrawal syndrome causes clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion
C). The symptoms must not be associated with the physiological effects of another medical
condition and are not better explained by another mental disorder (Criterion D).
Headache is the hallmark feature of caffeine withdrawal and may be diffuse, gradual in
development, throbbing, severe, and sensitive to movement. However, other symptoms of
caffeine withdrawal can occur in the absence of headache. Caffeine is the most widely used
behaviorally active drug in the world and is present in many different types of beverages (e.g.,
coffee, tea, mate, soft drinks, energy drinks), foods, energy aids, medications, and dietary
supplements. Because caffeine ingestion is often integrated into social customs and daily rituals
(e.g., coffee break, tea time), some caffeine consumers may be unaware of their physical
dependence on caffeine. Thus, caffeine withdrawal symptoms could be unexpected and
misattributed to other causes (e.g., the flu, migraine). Furthermore, caffeine withdrawal
symptoms may occur when individuals are required to abstain from foods and beverages prior to
medical procedures or when a usual caffeine dose is missed because of a change in routine (e.g.,
during travel, weekends).
The probability and severity of caffeine withdrawal generally increase as a function of usual
daily caffeine dose. However, there is large variability among individuals and within individuals
across different episodes in the incidence, severity, and time course of withdrawal symptoms.
Caffeine withdrawal symptoms may occur after abrupt cessation of relatively low chronic daily
doses of caffeine (i.e., 100 mg).
Associated Features
Caffeine abstinence has been shown to be associated with impaired behavioral and cognitive
performance (e.g., sustained attention), as well as with increased total sleep time, sleep
efficiency, and slow-wave sleep. Electroencephalographic studies have shown that caffeine
withdrawal symptoms are significantly associated with increases in theta power and decreases in
beta-2 power. Decreased motivation to work and decreased sociability have also been reported
during caffeine withdrawal. Increased analgesic use during caffeine withdrawal has been
documented.
Prevalence
More than 85% of adults and children in the United States regularly consume caffeine, with adult
caffeine consumers ingesting about 280 mg/day on average. The incidence and prevalence of the
