Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
caffeine withdrawal syndrome in the general population are unclear. In the United States,
headache may occur in approximately 50% of cases of caffeine abstinence.
573
In attempts to permanently stop caffeine use, more than 70% of individuals in a U.S.
metropolitan county reported at least one caffeine withdrawal symptom (47% experienced
headache), and 24% experienced headache plus one or more other symptoms as well as
functional impairment due to withdrawal. Among individuals who abstained from caffeine for at
least 24 hours but were not trying to permanently stop caffeine use, 11% experienced headache
plus one or more other symptoms as well as functional impairment. Caffeine consumers can
decrease the incidence of caffeine withdrawal by using caffeine daily or only infrequently (e.g.,
no more than 2 consecutive days). Gradual reduction in caffeine over a period of days or weeks
may decrease the incidence and severity of caffeine withdrawal.
Development and Course
Symptoms usually begin 12–24 hours after the last caffeine dose and peak after 1–2 days of
abstinence. Caffeine withdrawal symptoms last for 2–9 days, with the possibility of withdrawal
headaches occurring for up to 21 days. Symptoms usually remit rapidly (within 30–60 minutes)
after re-ingestion of caffeine. Doses of caffeine significantly less than the individual’s usual daily
dose may be sufficient to prevent or attenuate caffeine withdrawal symptoms (e.g., consumption
of 25 mg by an individual who typically consumes 300 mg).
Caffeine is unique in that it is a behaviorally active drug that is consumed by individuals of
nearly all ages, with rates of caffeine consumption and overall level of caffeine consumption
increasing with age. Although caffeine withdrawal among children and adolescents has been
documented, relatively little is known about risk factors for caffeine withdrawal among this age
group. The use of highly caffeinated energy drinks is increasing in young people, which could
increase the risk for caffeine withdrawal.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Heavy caffeine use has been observed among individuals with mental disorders,
including eating disorders and alcohol and other substance use disorders, as well as among
individuals who smoke cigarettes and those who are incarcerated. Thus, these individuals could
be at higher risk for caffeine withdrawal upon acute caffeine abstinence.
The unavailability of caffeine is an environmental risk factor for incipient
withdrawal symptoms. While caffeine is legal and usually widely available, there are conditions
in which caffeine use may be restricted, such as during medical procedures, pregnancy,
hospitalizations, religious observances, wartime, travel, and research participation. These
external environmental circumstances may precipitate a withdrawal syndrome in vulnerable
individuals.
Genetic factors appear to increase vulnerability to caffeine withdrawal,
but no specific genes have been identified.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
