Other medical conditions and medication side effects.
Caffeine-induced sleep disorder.
Habitual caffeine consumers who fast for religious reasons may be at increased risk for caffeine
withdrawal.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Metabolism of caffeine is slower in females who use oral contraceptives and in the luteal phase
of the menstrual cycle, and caffeine metabolism becomes progressively slower in the second and
third trimesters of pregnancy compared with the first trimester and the nonpregnant state. These
features reduce the rate of clearance and may diminish withdrawal, although they can also
lengthen the duration of caffeine-associated adverse symptoms. It is unlikely that doses < 300
mg/day are associated with adverse reproductive outcomes in pregnancy.
574
Functional Consequences of Caffeine Withdrawal
Caffeine withdrawal symptoms can vary from mild to extreme, at times causing functional
impairment in normal daily activities. Rates of functional impairment in studies conducted
largely in the United States range from 10% to 55% (median 13%), with rates as high as 73%
found among individuals who also show other problematic features of caffeine use. Examples of
functional impairment include being unable to work, exercise, or care for children; staying in bed
all day; missing religious services; ending a vacation early; and canceling a social gathering.
Caffeine withdrawal headaches may be described by individuals as “the worst headaches” ever
experienced. Decrements in cognitive and motor performance have also been observed.
Differential Diagnosis
Caffeine withdrawal can mimic migraine and
other headache disorders, viral illnesses, sinus conditions, tension, other drug withdrawal states
(e.g., from amphetamines, cocaine), and medication side effects. The final determination of
caffeine withdrawal should rest on a determination of the pattern and amount consumed, the time
interval between caffeine abstinence and onset of symptoms, and the particular clinical features
presented by the individual. A challenge dose of caffeine followed by symptom remission may
be used to confirm the diagnosis.
Caffeine withdrawal is distinguished from caffeine-induced sleep
disorder (e.g., caffeine-induced sleep disorder, insomnia type, with onset during withdrawal)
because the sleep symptoms are in excess of those usually associated caffeine withdrawal,
predominate in the clinical presentation, and are severe enough to warrant clinical attention.
Comorbidity
Caffeine withdrawal may be associated with major depressive disorder, generalized anxiety
disorder, panic disorder, antisocial personality disorder, moderate to severe alcohol use disorder,
and cannabis and cocaine use.
Caffeine-Induced Mental Disorders
