3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain cannabis, use
cannabis, or recover from its effects.
4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use cannabis.
5. Recurrent cannabis use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at
work, school, or home.
6. Continued cannabis use despite having persistent or recurrent social or
interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of cannabis.
7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
reduced because of cannabis use.
8. Recurrent cannabis use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.
9. Cannabis use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or
recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused
or exacerbated by cannabis.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of cannabis to achieve
intoxication or desired effect.
b. Markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
cannabis.
11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for cannabis (refer to Criteria A
and B of the criteria set for cannabis withdrawal).
b. Cannabis (or a closely related substance) is taken to relieve or avoid
withdrawal symptoms.
Specify if:
In early remission: After full criteria for cannabis use disorder were previously
met, none of the criteria for cannabis use disorder have been met for at least 3
months but
576
for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a
strong desire or urge to use cannabis,” may be met).
In sustained remission: After full criteria for cannabis use disorder were
previously met, none of the criteria for cannabis use disorder have been met at
any time during a period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion
A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use cannabis,” may be present).
Specify if:
In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
in an environment where access to cannabis is restricted.
Code based on current severity/remission: If a cannabis intoxication, cannabis
withdrawal, or another cannabis-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use
