the codes below for cannabis use disorder. Instead, the comorbid cannabis use
disorder is indicated in the 4th character of the cannabis-induced disorder code (see
the coding note for cannabis intoxication, cannabis withdrawal, or a specific
cannabis-induced mental disorder). For example, if there is comorbid cannabis-
induced anxiety disorder and cannabis use disorder, only the cannabis-induced
anxiety disorder code is given, with the 4th character indicating whether the
comorbid cannabis use disorder is mild, moderate, or severe: F12.180 for mild
cannabis use disorder with cannabis-induced anxiety disorder or F12.280 for a
moderate or severe cannabis use disorder with cannabis-induced anxiety disorder.
Specify current severity/remission:
F12.10 Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
F12.11 Mild, In early remission
F12.11 Mild, In sustained remission
F12.20 Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
F12.21 Moderate, In early remission
F12.21 Moderate, In sustained remission
F12.20 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
F12.21 Severe, In early remission
F12.21 Severe, In sustained remission
Specifiers
“In a controlled environment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is both
in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled environment
or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these environments are
closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.
Changing severity across time in an individual may also be reflected by changes in the
frequency (e.g., days of use per month or times used per day) and/or dose (e.g., amount used per
episode) of cannabis, as assessed by individual self-report, report of knowledgeable others,
clinician’s observations, and biological testing.
Diagnostic Features
Cannabis use disorder includes problems associated with use of substances derived from the
cannabis plant and chemically similar synthetic compounds. In these substances, the primary
component with psychoactive effects (and hence, addiction potential) is the cannabinoid delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-9-THC or THC). Cannabinoids have diverse effects in the brain,
prominent among which are actions on CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptors found throughout the
central nervous system.
577
Cannabis is used in many forms. It is most commonly smoked in a cigarette-like form (often
