called “joints” or “reefers”), and also in pipes, water pipes (bongs or hookahs), or hollowed-out
cigars (“blunts”). More recently developed methods include “vaping” (vaporizing) by heating
without combustion plant cannabis material to release psychoactive components for inhalation,
and “dabbing,” in which a concentrated cannabis product (butane hash oil, known as “dabs”),
created through butane extraction of THC from cannabis plant material, is heated and inhaled.
Vaping and dabbing are gaining popularity, particularly among youth. Cannabis can also be
ingested orally in food (edibles) or beverages. Inhalation typically produces more rapid and
intense onset of effects than oral administration. Hashish or hash oil, a concentrated extraction of
the cannabis plant, is also used. Across products, cannabis potency (THC concentration) varies
greatly, averaging 10%–15% in typical cannabis plant material, 30%–40% in hashish, and 50%–
55% in hash oil. During the past two decades, the potency of seized illegal plant cannabis has
steadily increased, and legal cannabis products may have even higher THC potency (e.g., 20%
for plant material and 68% for cannabis extracts). Synthetic oral THC formulations
(pill/capsules/sprays) are also available for various medical uses (e.g., chronic pain; nausea and
vomiting caused by chemotherapy or ano-rexia; weight loss among those with AIDS). Other
entirely illicit synthetic cannabinoid compounds (e.g., K2, Spice, JWH-018, JWH-073) are in the
form of plant material sprayed with a cannabinoid formulation. Although such synthetic
cannabinoids are designed to mimic cannabis effects, their chemical composition, potency,
effects, and duration of action are unpredictable, and they may cause more severe adverse effects
than cannabis plant products, including seizures, cardiac conditions, psychosis, and even death.
In the United States, cannabis remains an illegal substance under federal law, while the legal
status of cannabis varies by state. Thus, cannabis use under state law can involve an illicit
product, a product authorized for medical purposes, or a completely legal product. The most
common medical purpose for cannabis use is chronic pain, and the conditions approved for
medicinal cannabis use vary from state to state. When cannabis or a cannabinoid is taken as
indicated for a medical condition, tolerance and withdrawal (physiological dependence) may
occur but should not be the primary basis for diagnosing cannabis use disorder. The efficacy of
cannabis for different medical conditions continues to be debated, and cannabis use as medically
advised should be taken into account when a cannabis use disorder diagnosis is being considered.
Patterns of cannabis use can range from light, infrequent use to heavy, frequent use.
Individuals with DSM-5 cannabis use disorder use cannabis frequently (on average, 4 or more
days a week), and some individuals may use cannabis throughout the day over a period of
months or years. Because of the increasingly common perception that cannabis use is harmless,
individuals may not recognize that symptoms of cannabis use disorder (e.g., withdrawal
symptoms) are cannabis related. Additionally, among individuals with multiple substance use
disorders, lack of clarity about whether symptoms are caused by cannabis or by other substances
may lead to underreporting of cannabis use disorder symptoms.
Cannabis use disorder is defined by the same 11 criteria that define the other substance use
disorders, as supported by considerable empirical evidence. These criteria, a cluster of behavioral
and physical symptoms, lead to clinically significant impairment or distress and can include
withdrawal, tolerance, craving, spending a great deal of time in activities related to the substance,
and hazardous use (e.g., driving while under its influence). Some individuals who use cannabis
multiple times per day do not perceive themselves as spending excessive time under the
influence of cannabis or recovering from its effects, despite being intoxicated from cannabis or
coming down from its effects most of the time, most days. An important marker of a severe
