cannabis use disorder is continued use despite negative effects on other important activities or
relationships (e.g., school, work, sports, partner or parent relationship).
578
Regular cannabis users become tolerant to many acute cannabis effects, and cessation of
regular cannabis use generally leads to a cannabis withdrawal syndrome. Cannabis withdrawal
can cause significant distress, leading to continued use to relieve the symptoms and difficulty
quitting use or relapse.
Associated Features
Individuals who regularly use cannabis often report using it to cope with mood, insomnia, anger,
pain, or other physiological or psychological problems, and individuals diagnosed with cannabis
use disorder frequently have other concurrent mental disorders. Careful assessment can reveal
that cannabis use contributes to exacerbation of these symptoms, as well as other reasons for
frequent use (e.g., the coping motives listed above; to experience euphoria; as an enjoyable
social activity). Chronic intake of cannabis can produce a lack of motivation that resembles
persistent depressive disorder.
Because some individuals may underreport the amount or frequency of their cannabis use,
provider awareness of common signs and symptoms of cannabis use and intoxication facilitates
better assessment of cannabis use disorder. Some additional signs of acute and chronic use are
red eyes (conjunctival injection), cannabis odor on clothing, yellowing of fingertips (from
smoking joints), chronic cough, burning of incense (to hide the odor), and exaggerated craving
and impulse for specific foods, sometimes at odd times of the day or night.
Prevalence
Cannabinoids, especially cannabis, are the most widely used illicit psychoactive substances in
the United States. The following prevalence data are drawn from U.S.-based studies, unless
otherwise noted. Among youth (ages 12–17 years), the past-year prevalence of DSM-IV
cannabis use disorder is 2.7%–3.1%. Among adults age 18 years and older, the prevalence is
1.5%–2.9%. Among cannabis users, the prevalence of DSM-IV cannabis use disorder is 20.4%
among youth and 30.6% among adults. For DSM-5 cannabis use disorder, 12-month prevalence
is approximately 2.5% among adults (1.4%, 0.6%, and 0.6% at mild, moderate, and severe
levels, respectively). During the past decade, the prevalence of cannabis use disorder has
decreased among adolescents. In contrast, among adults, some studies suggest that the
prevalence of cannabis use disorder has either remained stable or increased—for example,
among adults in the general population, patients in inpatient settings, and patients in the Veterans
Health Administration. Globally, the age-standardized rate of cannabis use disorders was 289.7
per 100,000 people in 2016, a 25.6% increase over 1990. Prevalence varies widely across
geographic regions, being lowest in Western Sub-Saharan Africa and highest in North America.
According to age, the prevalence of cannabis use disorder in the United States is highest
among individuals ages 18–29 years (6.9%) and lowest among individuals age 45 years and
older (0.8%). Rates of cannabis use disorder are greater in men than in women (3.5% vs. 1.7%)
and in boys than in girls ages 12–17 years (3.4% vs. 2.8%), although gender differences have
