been narrowing in recent birth cohorts across several countries. Regarding ethnoracial
differences, for adolescents ages 12–17 years, rates are highest among Hispanics (3.8%),
followed by Whites (3.1%), African Americans (2.9%), and other ethnoracial groups (2.3%).
Among adults, the prevalence of cannabis use disorder is 5.3% in American Indians and Alaska
Natives, 4.5% in African Americans, 2.6% in Hispanics, 2.2% in Whites, and 1.3% in Asians
and Pacific Islanders. In the United States and other high-income countries, the number of
individuals seeking treatment for cannabis-related problems has increased since the 1990s.
However, among adults with cannabis use disorder, only 7%–8% received any type of cannabis-
specific treatment in the past year, indicating that cannabis use disorder is a seriously
undertreated condition.
579
Development and Course
The onset of cannabis use disorder can occur at any age but is most common during adolescence
or young adulthood. The increasing acceptability and availability of medical and recreational
marijuana may impact the development and course of cannabis use disorder, with increased onset
among older adults.
Generally, cannabis use disorder develops over an extended period of time, although the
progression may be more rapid in adolescents, particularly in those with conduct problems. Most
individuals who develop a cannabis use disorder establish a pattern of cannabis use that
gradually increases in frequency and amount. Beginning around 2010, cannabis has increasingly
displaced alcohol and tobacco in the United States as the first psychoactive substance used
during adolescence. This may be attributable to the decrease in perceived harmfulness of
cannabis use among adolescents and adults and the fact that many now perceive cannabis use as
less harmful than alcohol or tobacco use.
Cannabis use disorder among preteens, adolescents, and young adults is associated with
preferences for novelty-seeking and risk-taking, norm-violating or other illegal behaviors, and
conduct disorder. Milder cases of cannabis use disorder in youth primarily reflect continued use
despite problems related to disapproval of use by peers, school administration, or family, and can
place youths at risk for physical or behavioral consequences. In more severe cases, progression
to using alone or using throughout the day interferes with daily functioning and takes the place of
previously established, prosocial activities.
Cannabis use disorder among adults typically involves well-established patterns of daily
cannabis use that continue despite clear psychosocial or medical problems. Many adults
experience repeated desire to stop or have failed at repeated cessation attempts. Milder adult
cases may resemble mild adolescent cases in that cannabis use is not as frequent or heavy but
continues despite potential significant consequences of sustained use. The rate of use among U.S.
middle-age and older adults is increasing, which may be atributable to increased availability and
acceptability, along with a possible “baby boomer” cohort effect resulting from high prevalence
of use among those who were young adults in the late 1960s and the 1970s.
Early onset of cannabis use (e.g., prior to age 15 years) is a robust predictor of the
development of cannabis use disorder and other types of substance use disorders and mental
disorders during young adulthood. Such early onset is often concurrent with other externalizing
