Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
problems (e.g., symptoms of conduct disorder). However, early onset is also a predictor of
internalizing problems and as such may reflect a general risk factor for the development of
mental disorders.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
A history of conduct disorder in childhood or adolescence and antisocial
personality disorder are risk factors for the development of many substance use disorders,
including cannabis use disorder. Other risk factors include externalizing or internalizing
disorders during childhood or adolescence. Youth with high behavioral disinhibition scores show
early-onset substance use disorders, including cannabis use disorder and multiple substance
involvement, and early conduct problems.
Risk factors include unstable or abusive family situations, use of cannabis among
immediate family members, a childhood history of emotional or physical abuse or the violent
death of a close family member or friend, a family history of substance use disorders, and low
socioeconomic status. As with all substances of abuse, the ease of availability of the substance is
a risk factor; cannabis is relatively easy to obtain in most cultures, which increases the risk of
developing a cannabis use disorder. Increasingly permissive U.S. state medical and recreational
marijuana laws have reduced barriers to obtaining cannabis in about two-thirds of U.S. states.
Living in a U.S. state that has legalized recreational
580
marijuana use increases the risk for adult cannabis use disorder. The risk of the disorder among
past-year cannabis users is higher among Black, Native American, Hispanic, and Asian
American adults and adolescents, relative to non-Hispanic Whites.
Genetic influences contribute to the development of cannabis use
disorders. Heritable factors contribute between 30% and 80% of the total variance in risk of
cannabis use disorders, although studies have not yet definitively identified the specific genetic
variants involved. Genetic and environmental influences shared between cannabis and other
types of substance use disorders suggest a general common basis for substance use disorders that
includes cannabis use disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The acceptability of cannabis for medical and recreational use has varied widely over time and
across cultural contexts. Currently, cannabis is one of the world’s most commonly used
psychoactive substances. In some cultural settings, cannabis use is influenced by ethnicity,
religion, and sociocultural practices, such as political movements.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Compared with men, women report more severe cannabis withdrawal symptoms, especially
mood symptoms such as irritability, restlessness, and anger, and gastrointestinal symptoms such
as stomachache and nausea, which may contribute to potential telescoping (faster transition from
first cannabis use to cannabis use disorder).
