Past-month cannabis use was reported by 7.0% of pregnant women in a nationally
representative U.S. survey in 2016–2017. The rate of cannabis use is lower in pregnant compared
with nonpregnant women, but resumption of use following delivery occurs in the majority who
attain abstinence in pregnancy.
Diagnostic Markers
Detection of 11-nor-9-carboxy-delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THCCOOH) in urine is often used
as a biological marker of cannabis use. In frequent users, urine tests for THCCOOH often remain
positive for weeks after last use, limiting the uses for these tests (e.g., remission status), and
expertise in urine testing methods is needed to reliably interpret results. However, a positive
result can be useful in working with individuals who deny all use despite concerns of family or
friends. Tests for the presence of cannabinoids in blood that give more fine-grained results are
under active development, and the development of detection using oral fluids may eventually
offer the possibility of roadside tests to use in driving safety efforts.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
In a study of Iraq/Afghanistan-era veterans, after adjustment for multiple sociodemographic
factors, psychiatric and other substance comorbidities, and past trauma, including combat,
cannabis use disorder was still associated with increased risk of both suicidal and nonsuicidal
self-injury. In a study of all U.S. Veterans Health Administration patients in 2005, any current
substance use disorder was associated with increased suicide risk in both sexes but especially
among women. In particular, men with cannabis use disorder had a suicide rate of 79 per
100,000 person-years, and women with cannabis use disorder had a suicide rate of 47 per
100,000 person-years. A review and meta-analysis of the international literature from 1990
through 2015 found evidence that chronic cannabis use, but not acute cannabis use, is associated
with suicidal thoughts and behavior.
Functional Consequences of Cannabis Use Disorder
Functional consequences of cannabis use disorder are part of the diagnostic criteria. Many areas
of psychosocial, cognitive, and health functioning may be compromised in relation to
581
cannabis use disorder. Although it can be difficult to distinguish the short-term impairments due
to cannabis intoxication from the longer-term functional consequences of cannabis use disorder,
cognitive function (particularly higher executive function) even while unintoxicated may become
compromised in cannabis users in a cumulative dose-dependent relationship, which may
contribute to difficulty at school or work. Accidents due to potentially dangerous activities while
under the influence (e.g., driving, sports, at work) are also of concern. In particular, placebo-
controlled studies and large-scale epidemiological studies show that cannabis use impairs driver
reaction time, spatial perceptions, and decision-making. Cannabis use has also been linked to a
reduction in goal-directed activity and decreased self-efficacy, labeled an amotivational
syndrome, that manifests itself in poor school or work performance. Similarly, cannabis-
associated problems with social relationships are commonly reported in those with cannabis use
