Nonproblematic use of cannabis.
Cannabis intoxication, cannabis withdrawal, and cannabis-induced mental disorders.
disorder. Cannabis use is associated with poorer life satisfaction and increased treatment and
hospitalization for mental health problems.
Differential Diagnosis
Although the majority of individuals who use cannabis do not
have problems related to its use, 20%–30% of cannabis users do experience symptoms and
associated consequences consistent with a cannabis use disorder. Differentiating nonproblematic
use of cannabis and cannabis use disorder can be challenging because individuals may not
attribute cannabis-related social, behavioral, or psychological problems to the substance,
especially in the context of polysubstance use. Also, failure to acknowledge heavy cannabis use
and its role in associated problems is common among individuals referred to treatment by others
(i.e., school, family, employer, criminal justice system).
Cannabis 
use
disorder is differentiated from cannabis intoxication, cannabis withdrawal, and cannabis-induced
mental disorders (e.g., cannabis-induced anxiety disorder) in that cannabis use disorder describes
a problematic pattern of cannabis use that involves impaired control over cannabis use, social
impairment due to cannabis use, risky cannabis use (e.g., driving while intoxicated), and
pharmacological symptoms (the development of tolerance or withdrawal), whereas cannabis
intoxication, cannabis withdrawal, and cannabis-induced mental disorders describe psychiatric
syndromes that develop in the context of heavy use. Cannabis intoxication, cannabis withdrawal,
and cannabis-induced mental disorders occur frequently in individuals with cannabis use
disorder. In such cases, a diagnosis of cannabis intoxication, cannabis withdrawal, or a cannabis-
induced mental disorder should be given in addition to a diagnosis of cannabis use disorder, the
presence of which is indicated in the diagnostic code.
Comorbidity
Cannabis use disorder is highly comorbid with other substance use disorders (e.g., alcohol,
cocaine, opioids). For example, compared with adults without cannabis use disorder, having a
cannabis use disorder multiplies the risk for any other substance disorder by a factor of about
nine. Cannabis has been commonly considered as a “gateway” drug because individuals who use
cannabis have a substantially greater lifetime probability than nonusers of subsequently using
other, more risky substances (e.g., opioids or cocaine). Among adults seeking treatment for a
cannabis use disorder, many (63%) report problematic use of secondary or tertiary substances,
including alcohol, cocaine, methamphetamine/amphetamine, and heroin or other opiates, and
cannabis use disorder is often a secondary or tertiary problem among those with a primary
diagnosis of other substance use disorders. Among adolescents in treatment, cannabis is
frequently the primary substance of abuse (76%).
582
Among adults with DSM-5 cannabis use disorder, 64% had a past-year tobacco use disorder,
and the odds of a comorbid tobacco disorder increased sharply as the severity of cannabis use
disorder increased.
Co-occurring mental disorders are also common among those with cannabis use disorder and
