include major depressive disorder, bipolar I and II disorders, anxiety disorders, posttraumatic
stress disorder, and personality disorders. In a Minnesota twin study, about half of adolescents
with cannabis use disorder had internalizing disorders (e.g., anxiety, depression, posttraumatic
stress disorder), and 64% had externalizing disorders (e.g., conduct disorder, attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder).
Considerable concern has been raised about cannabis use as a risk factor in schizophrenia and
other psychotic disorders. Cannabis use in critical periods is consistently associated with a
threefold increase in the risk for psychosis. Differences in frequency of daily cannabis use and
use of high-potency varieties of cannabis may have contributed to the striking variation in the
incidence of psychotic disorder across 11 European sites. The population attributable fraction
from regular cannabis in explaining hospital admissions for psychosis was estimated to be 17.7%
(95% CI: 1.2%–45.5%) in Chile. On the other hand, some data suggest that childhood abuse may
be the determining factor that increases the risk for cannabis abuse and for psychosis. Overall,
cannabis use may contribute to the onset of an acute psychotic episode, can exacerbate some
symptoms, and can adversely affect treatment of a major psychotic illness.
Regarding medical conditions, cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome is a syndrome of nausea
and cyclic vomiting associated with regular cannabis use that is increasingly seen in emergency
departments as the prevalence of cannabis use increases. In addition, respiratory disorders (e.g.,
asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, pneumonia) are associated with regular cannabis
use (by smoking, vaping, or e-cigarettes) regardless of tobacco co-use, as are some adverse
cardiovascular outcomes.
Cannabis Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recent use of cannabis.
B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g.,
impaired motor coordination, euphoria, anxiety, sensation of slowed time,
impaired judgment, social withdrawal) that developed during, or shortly after,
cannabis use.
C. Two (or more) of the following signs or symptoms developing within 2 hours of
cannabis use:
1. Conjunctival injection.
2. Increased appetite.
3. Dry mouth.
4. Tachycardia.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with
another substance.
Specify if:
