With perceptual disturbances: Hallucinations with intact reality testing or
auditory, visual, or tactile illusions occur in the absence of a delirium.
Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid
cannabis use disorder and whether or not there are perceptual disturbances.
583
For cannabis intoxication, without perceptual disturbances: If a mild
cannabis use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F12.120, and if a
moderate or severe cannabis use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is
F12.220. If there is no comorbid cannabis use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM
code is F12.920.
For cannabis intoxication, with perceptual disturbances: If a mild cannabis
use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F12.122, and if a moderate or
severe cannabis use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F12.222. If
there is no comorbid cannabis use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is
F12.922.
Specifiers
When hallucinations occur in the absence of intact reality testing, a diagnosis of
substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder should be considered.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of cannabis intoxication is the presence of clinically significant problematic
behavioral or psychological changes that develop during, or shortly after, cannabis use (Criterion
B). Intoxication typically begins with a “high” feeling followed by symptoms that include
euphoria with inappropriate laughter and grandiosity, sedation, lethargy, impairment in short-
term memory, difficulty carrying out complex mental processes, impaired judgment, distorted
sensory perceptions, impaired motor performance, and the sensation that time is passing slowly.
Occasionally, anxiety (which can be severe), dysphoria, or social withdrawal occurs. These
psychoactive effects are accompanied by two or more of the following signs, developing within
2 hours of cannabis use: conjunctival injection, increased appetite, dry mouth, and tachycardia
(Criterion C).
Intoxication develops within minutes if plant cannabis is smoked, and may take a few hours
to develop when the cannabis is ingested orally. The effects usually last 3–4 hours, with duration
longer when the substance is ingested orally. The magnitude of the behavioral and physiological
changes depends on the dose, the method of administration, and the characteristics of the
individual using the substance, such as rate of absorption, tolerance, and sensitivity to the effects
of the substance. Because most cannabinoids, including delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-9-
THC), are fat soluble, the effects of cannabis or hashish may occasionally persist or reoccur for
12–24 hours because of the slow release of psychoactive substances from fatty tissue or to
enterohepatic circulation.
Synthetic cannabinoids (e.g., Spice), whose use has become more common in recent years,
