Other substance intoxication.
Cannabis-induced mental disorders.
also produce rapid effects, including euphoria, talkativeness, feelings of joy and laughter, and
relaxation. In terms of psychoactive effects, low doses of synthetic cannabinoids and other
cannabis products are similar. At higher doses of synthetic cannabinoids, delusional and
hallucinatory symptoms are more likely to occur.
Prevalence
The prevalence of episodes of cannabis intoxication in the general population is unknown.
However, it is probable that most individuals using cannabis would at some time experience
symptoms that meet criteria for cannabis intoxication. Given this, the prevalence of individuals
using cannabis and the prevalence of individuals experiencing cannabis intoxication are likely
similar.
Functional Consequences of Cannabis Intoxication
Impairment from cannabis intoxication may have serious consequences, including dysfunction at
work or school, social indiscretions, failure to fulfill role obligations, traffic accidents, and
having unprotected sex. In rare cases, cannabis intoxication may precipitate a psychosis that may
vary in duration.
584
Differential Diagnosis
Note that if the clinical presentation includes hallucinations in the absence of intact reality
testing, a diagnosis of substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder should be considered.
Cannabis intoxication may resemble intoxication with other types of
substances. However, in contrast to cannabis intoxication, alcohol intoxication and sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication frequently decrease appetite, increase aggressive behavior,
and produce nystagmus or ataxia. Hallucinogens in low doses may cause a clinical picture that
resembles cannabis intoxication. Phencyclidine, like cannabis, can be smoked and also causes
perceptual changes, but phencyclidine intoxication is much more likely to cause ataxia and
aggressive behavior.
Cannabis intoxication is distinguished from cannabis-induced
mental disorders (e.g., cannabis-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during intoxication)
because the symptoms (e.g., anxiety) in these latter disorders are in excess of those usually
associated with cannabis intoxication, predominate in the clinical presentation, and are severe
enough to warrant independent clinical attention.
Comorbidity
Given the typical overlap of cannabis intoxication with cannabis use disorder, see “Comorbidity”
under Cannabis Use Disorder for more details about co-occurring conditions that are likely to be
encountered.
Cannabis Withdrawal
