Diagnostic Criteria
A. Cessation of cannabis use that has been heavy and prolonged (i.e., usually daily
or almost daily use over a period of at least a few months).
B. Three (or more) of the following signs and symptoms develop within
approximately 1 week after Criterion A:
1. Irritability, anger, or aggression.
2. Nervousness or anxiety.
3. Sleep difficulty (e.g., insomnia, disturbing dreams).
4. Decreased appetite or weight loss.
5. Restlessness.
6. Depressed mood.
7. At least one of the following physical symptoms causing significant
discomfort: abdominal pain, shakiness/tremors, sweating, fever, chills, or
headache.
C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication or
withdrawal from another substance.
Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid
cannabis use disorder. If a mild cannabis use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM
code is F12.13, and if a moderate or severe cannabis use disorder is comorbid, the
ICD-10-CM code is F12.23. For cannabis withdrawal occurring in the absence of a
cannabis use disorder (e.g., in a patient taking cannabis solely under appropriate
medical supervision), the ICD-10-CM code is F12.93.
585
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of cannabis withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal
syndrome that develops after the cessation of regular cannabis use. Regular users become
tolerant to many acute cannabis effects, and cessation of regular use can lead to a cannabis
withdrawal syndrome. Common cannabis withdrawal symptoms include irritability, depressed
mood, anxiety, restlessness, sleep difficulty, and decreased appetite or weight loss. Cannabis
withdrawal can cause significant distress, leading to continued use to relieve the symptoms,
difficulty in quitting, and relapse. Unlike withdrawal from other substances (i.e., opioids,
alcohol, sedatives), behavioral and emotional symptoms (e.g., nervousness, irritability, sleep
difficulty) are often more common than physical symptoms (e.g., shakiness, sweating).
Associated Features
