Cannabis withdrawal may be accompanied by observed fatigue, yawning, difficulty
concentrating, and rebound periods of increased appetite and hypersomnia that follow initial
periods of loss of appetite and insomnia.
Prevalence
Among adult and adolescent cannabis users, prevalence estimates of cannabis withdrawal
symptoms vary widely, from 35% to 95%, based on research in the United States and other
countries. Some of the variation in rates is likely attributable to assessment methods, and some to
differences between samples. Among adult regular cannabis users in the general population, 12%
reported signs and symptoms that met criteria for the full syndrome of DSM-5 cannabis
withdrawal, with substantial differences in prevalence among non-Latinx Whites (10%), African
Americans (15.3%), and Asian Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Pacific Islanders (31%).
Among adults and adolescents who are enrolled in treatment or are heavy cannabis users, 50%–
95% report cannabis withdrawal. These findings indicate that cannabis withdrawal occurs among
a substantial subset of regular cannabis users who try to quit.
Development and Course
Withdrawal onset typically occurs within 24–48 hours after cessation of use. It peaks within 2–5
days and resolves within 1–2 weeks, although sleep disturbance can persist longer. The amount,
duration, and frequency of cannabis smoking required to produce cannabis withdrawal are
unknown, but more chronic and frequent cannabis use is associated with greater quantity and
severity of withdrawal symptoms. Cannabis withdrawal can occur in adults and adolescents.
Women may experience more severe cannabis withdrawal symptoms than men.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Among cannabis users, the propensity to experience cannabis withdrawal is moderately
heritable, indicating genetic influences. The prevalence and severity of cannabis withdrawal are
greater among heavier cannabis users, particularly those seeking treatment for cannabis use
disorder. Withdrawal severity may also be related to the presence and severity of comorbid
symptoms of mental disorders.
Functional Consequences of Cannabis Withdrawal
Cannabis users report using cannabis to relieve withdrawal symptoms, making cannabis
withdrawal a contributor to the persistence of cannabis use disorder. This makes cannabis
withdrawal a current target for medication development. Worse outcomes may be
586
associated with greater withdrawal. Sleep difficulty has been reported as the withdrawal
symptom most often associated with relapse to cannabis use. Cannabis users report having
relapsed to cannabis use or initiating use of other drugs (e.g., tranquilizers) to provide relief from
cannabis withdrawal symptoms.
