8. Recurrent phencyclidine use in situations in which it is physically hazardous
(e.g., driving an automobile or operating a machine when impaired by a
phencyclidine).
9. Phencyclidine use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or
recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused
or exacerbated by the phencyclidine.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of the phencyclidine to achieve
intoxication or desired effect.
588
b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
the phencyclidine.
Note: Withdrawal symptoms and signs are not established for phencyclidines, and
so this criterion does not apply. (Withdrawal from phencyclidines has been reported
in animals but not documented in human users.)
Specify if:
In early remission: After full criteria for phencyclidine use disorder were
previously met, none of the criteria for phencyclidine use disorder have been met
for at least 3 months but for less than 12 months (with the exception that
Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the phencyclidine,” may
be met).
In sustained remission: After full criteria for phencyclidine use disorder were
previously met, none of the criteria for phencyclidine use disorder have been met
at any time during a period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that
Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the phencyclidine,” may
be met).
Specify if:
In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
in an environment where access to phencyclidines is restricted.
Code based on current severity/remission: If a phencyclidine intoxication or
another phencyclidine-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use the codes
below for phencyclidine use disorder. Instead, the comorbid phencyclidine use
disorder is indicated in the 4th character of the phencyclidine-induced disorder code
(see the coding note for phencyclidine intoxication or a specific phencyclidine-
induced mental disorder). For example, if there is comorbid phencyclidine-induced
psychotic disorder, only the phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder code is given,
with the 4th character indicating whether the comorbid phencyclidine use disorder is
mild, moderate, or severe: F16.159 for mild phencyclidine use disorder with
phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder or F16.259 for a moderate or severe
phencyclidine use disorder with phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder.
