Specify current severity/remission:
F16.10 Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
F16.11 Mild, In early remission
F16.11 Mild, In sustained remission
F16.20 Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
F16.21 Moderate, In early remission
F16.21 Moderate, In sustained remission
F16.20 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
F16.21 Severe, In early remission
F16.21 Severe, In sustained remission
Specifiers
“In a controlled environment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is both
in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled environment
or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these environments are
closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.
Diagnostic Features
The phencyclidines (or phencyclidine-like substances) include phencyclidine (e.g., PCP, “angel
dust”) and less potent but similarly acting compounds such as ketamine,
589
cyclohexamine, and dizocilpine. These substances were first developed as dissociative
anesthetics in the 1950s and became street drugs in the 1960s. They produce feelings of
separation from mind and body (hence “dissociative”) in low doses, and at high doses, stupor
and coma can result. These substances are most commonly smoked or taken orally, but they may
also be snorted or injected. Although the primary psychoactive effects of phencyclidine last for a
few hours, the total elimination rate of this drug from the body typically extends 8 days or
longer. The hallucinogenic effects in vulnerable individuals may last for weeks and may
precipitate a persistent psychotic episode resembling schizophrenia. Ketamine has been observed
to have utility in the treatment of major depressive disorder. Withdrawal symptoms have not
been clearly established in humans, and therefore the withdrawal criterion is not included in the
diagnosis of phencyclidine use disorder.
Associated Features
Phencyclidine may be detected in urine for up to 8 days or even longer at very high doses. In
addition to laboratory tests to detect its presence, characteristic symptoms resulting from
intoxication with phencyclidine or related substances may aid in its diagnosis. Phencyclidine is
likely to produce dissociative symptoms, analgesia, nystagmus, risk of hypertension/hypotension
and shock, euphoria, visual/auditory hallucinations, derealization, and unusual thought content.
