Other substance use disorders.
Phencyclidine intoxication and phencyclidine-induced mental disorders.
Violent behavior can also occur with phencyclidine use, as intoxicated individuals may believe
that they are being attacked.
Prevalence
Data on the prevalence of phencyclidine use disorder are not available, but rates appear to be low
(based on rates of the overall category of hallucinogen use disorder, which includes
phencyclidine, of about 0.1% among individuals age 12 and older in the United States).
Furthermore, among U.S. substance use treatment facility admissions, only 0.3% of the admitted
individuals endorsed phencyclidine as their primary drug.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
In a general population study in Australia, ketamine users were more likely to be men and to
have consumed more than 11 standard drinks per day.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
The gender ratio for phencyclidine use disorder is not known, but among U.S. substance use
treatment facility admissions endorsing phencyclidine as the primary drug, 62% were men.
Diagnostic Markers
Laboratory testing may be useful, as phencyclidine is present in the urine in intoxicated
individuals up to 8 days after ingestion. The individual’s history along with certain physical
signs (e.g., nystagmus, analgesia, prominent hypertension) may aid in distinguishing the
phencyclidine clinical picture from that of other hallucinogens.
Functional Consequences of Phencyclidine Use Disorder
In individuals with phencyclidine use disorder, there may be physical evidence of injuries from
accidents, fights, and falls. Chronic use of phencyclidine can lead to acute and persistent
cognitive impairment; urinary tract and intestinal symptoms; abdominal pain, chest pain,
palpitations, and tachycardia; respiratory depression; sleep disorders; and depression.
590
Differential Diagnosis
Distinguishing the effects of phencyclidine from those of other
substances may be important, because phencyclidine can be an additive to other substances (e.g.,
cannabis, cocaine).
Phencyclidine use disorder is
differentiated from phencyclidine intoxication and phencyclidine-induced mental disorders (e.g.,
phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder) in that phencyclidine use disorder describes a
problematic pattern of phencyclidine use that involves impaired control over phencyclidine use,
social impairment attributable to phencyclidine use, risky phencyclidine use (e.g., driving while
intoxicated), and pharmacological symptoms (the development of tolerance), whereas
