Independent mental disorders.
phencyclidine intoxication and phencyclidine-induced mental disorders describe psychiatric
syndromes that occur in the context of heavy use. Phencyclidine intoxication and phencyclidine-
induced mental disorders occur frequently in individuals with phencyclidine use disorder. In
such cases, a diagnosis of phencyclidine intoxication or a phencyclidine-induced mental disorder
should be given in addition to a diagnosis of phencyclidine use disorder, the presence of which is
indicated in the diagnostic code.
Some of the effects of phencyclidine use may resemble symptoms
of independent mental disorders, such as psychosis (schizophrenia); low mood (major depressive
disorder); and violent, aggressive behaviors (conduct disorder, antisocial personality disorder).
Discerning whether these behaviors occurred before the intake of the drug is important in the
differentiation of acute drug effects from a preexisting mental disorder.
Comorbidity
Conduct disorder in adolescents and antisocial personality disorder may be associated with
phencyclidine use. Other substance use disorders, especially alcohol, cocaine, and amphetamine
use disorders, are common among those with phencyclidine use disorder.
Other Hallucinogen Use Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A problematic pattern of hallucinogen (other than phencyclidine) use leading to
clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of the
following, occurring within a 12-month period:
1. The hallucinogen is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than
was intended.
2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control
hallucinogen use.
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the hallucinogen,
use the hallucinogen, or recover from its effects.
4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the hallucinogen.
5. Recurrent hallucinogen use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations
at work, school, or home (e.g., repeated absences from work or poor work
performance related to hallucinogen use; hallucinogen-related absences,
suspensions, or expulsions from school; neglect of children or household).
6. Continued hallucinogen use despite having persistent or recurrent social or
interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of the
hallucinogen (e.g., arguments with a spouse about consequences of
intoxication; physical fights).
591
