7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
reduced because of hallucinogen use.
8. Recurrent hallucinogen use in situations in which it is physically hazardous
(e.g., driving an automobile or operating a machine when impaired by the
hallucinogen).
9. Hallucinogen use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or
recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused
or exacerbated by the hallucinogen.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of the hallucinogen to achieve
intoxication or desired effect.
b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
the hallucinogen.
Note: Withdrawal symptoms and signs are not established for hallucinogens, and so
this criterion does not apply.
Specify the particular hallucinogen.
Specify if:
In early remission: After full criteria for other hallucinogen use disorder were
previously met, none of the criteria for other hallucinogen use disorder have
been met for at least 3 months but for less than 12 months (with the exception
that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the hallucinogen,”
may be met).
In sustained remission: After full criteria for other hallucinogen use disorder
were previously met, none of the criteria for other hallucinogen use disorder
have been met at any time during a period of 12 months or longer (with the
exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the
hallucinogen,” may be met).
Specify if:
In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
in an environment where access to hallucinogens is restricted.
Code based on current severity/remission: If a hallucinogen intoxication or
another hallucinogen-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use the codes
below for hallucinogen use disorder. Instead, the comorbid hallucinogen use
disorder is indicated in the 4th character of the hallucinogen-induced disorder code
(see the coding note for hallucinogen intoxication or specific hallucinogen-induced
mental disorder). For example, if there is comorbid hallucinogen-induced psychotic
disorder and hallucinogen use disorder, only the hallucinogen-induced psychotic
disorder code is given, with the 4th character indicating whether the comorbid
hallucinogen use disorder is mild, moderate, or severe: F16.159 for mild
hallucinogen use disorder with hallucinogen-induced psychotic disorder or F16.259
for a moderate or severe hallucinogen use disorder with hallucinogen-induced
psychotic disorder.
