Specify current severity/remission:
F16.10 Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
F16.11 Mild, In early remission
F16.11 Mild, In sustained remission
F16.20 Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
F16.21 Moderate, In early remission
F16.21 Moderate, In sustained remission
F16.20 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
F16.21 Severe, In early remission
F16.21 Severe, In sustained remission
592
Specifiers
“In a controlled environment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is both
in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled environment
or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these environments are
closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.
Diagnostic Features
Hallucinogens comprise a diverse group of substances that despite having different chemical
structures and possibly involving different molecular mechanisms, produce similar alterations of
perception, mood, and cognition in users. Hallucinogens included are phenylalkylamines (e.g.,
mescaline, 
DOM 
[2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine], 
and 
MDMA 
[3,4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine; also called “ecstasy” or “molly”]); the indoleamines,
including psilocybin (and its metabolite psilocin, the compound primarily responsible for the
psychedelic effects of hallucinogenic mushrooms) and dimethyltryptamine (DMT); and the
ergolines, such as LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) and morning glory seeds. In addition,
miscellaneous other ethnobotanical compounds are classified as hallucinogens, of which Salvia
divinorum and jimsonweed are two examples. Excluded from the hallucinogen group are
cannabis and its active compound, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) (see the section
“Cannabis-Related Disorders”). These substances can have hallucinogenic effects but are
diagnosed separately because of significant differences in their psychological and behavioral
effects.
Hallucinogens are usually taken orally, although some forms are smoked (e.g., DMT, salvia)
or (rarely) taken intranasally or by injection (e.g., ecstasy). Duration of effects varies across
types of hallucinogens. Some of these substances (i.e., LSD, MDMA) have a long half-life and
extended duration such that users may spend hours to days using and/or recovering from the
effects of these drugs. However, other hallucinogenic drugs (e.g., DMT, salvia) are short acting.
Tolerance to hallucinogens develops with repeated use and has been reported to have both
autonomic and psychological effects.
