Temperamental.
MDMA/ecstasy as a hallucinogen may have distinctive effects attributable to both its
hallucinogenic and its stimulant properties. Ecstasy users have a higher risk of developing a
hallucinogen use disorder than those using other hallucinogens. Among both adolescent and
adult ecstasy users and users of other hallucinogens, the most frequently reported hallucinogen
use disorder criteria are tolerance, hazardous use, use despite emotional or health problems,
giving up activities in favor of use, and spending a lot of time obtaining, using, or recovering
from the effects of use. As found for other substances, diagnostic criteria for other hallucinogen
use disorder are arrayed along a single continuum of severity.
Given that a clinically significant withdrawal syndrome has not been consistently
documented in humans, the diagnosis of hallucinogen withdrawal syndrome is not included in
this manual and therefore is not part of the hallucinogen use disorder diagnostic criteria.
However, there may be evidence of withdrawal from MDMA, with endorsement of any two or
more withdrawal symptoms (e.g., malaise, appetite disturbance, mood changes [anxious,
depressed, irritable], poor concentration, sleep disruption) or withdrawal avoidance observed in
more than half of individuals in diverse samples of ecstasy users in the United States and
internationally.
Associated Features
The characteristic symptom features of use of some hallucinogens can aid in diagnosis if urine or
blood toxicology results are not available. For example, individuals who use LSD tend to
experience visual hallucinations that can be frightening.
Prevalence
Other hallucinogen use disorder is rare. In the U.S. general population, about 0.1% of individuals
age 12 or older endorsed the symptoms of past 12-month hallucinogen use disorder in 2018. The
rate was 0.2% among those ages 12–17, 0.4% among those ages 18–25,
593
and < 0.1% among those age 26 and older. Prevalence is higher in U.S. clinical samples (e.g.,
19% in adolescents in treatment), and among select groups of individuals who use hallucinogens
frequently (e.g., recent heavy ecstasy use) in the United States and Australia, 73.5% of adults and
77% of adolescents have a problematic pattern of use that may meet other hallucinogen use
disorder criteria.
Development and Course
Prevalence of other hallucinogen use disorder by age among adolescents is unknown. Among
U.S. adults age 18 years and older, most (90%) of those with other hallucinogen use disorder are
ages 18–29, suggesting that the disorder is not often persistent and is concentrated in young
adults.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
The use of specific hallucinogens (i.e., ecstasy, salvia) has been linked with high
