Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
sensation-seeking.
On the basis of research in the United States, environmental risk factors of other
hallucinogen use disorder include higher income, lower education, being never married, and
residing in urban areas. Early onset of hallucinogen use has also been linked to transition to
hallucinogen use disorder. Peer use of other drugs is also highly associated with ecstasy and
salvia use.
Among male twins, total variance due to additive genetics has been
estimated to range from 26% to 79%, with inconsistent evidence for shared environmental
influences.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Historically, hallucinogens have been used as part of established religious or spiritual practices,
such as the use of peyote in the Native American Church and in Mexico. Ritual use by
Indigenous populations of psilocybin obtained from certain types of mushrooms has occurred in
South America, Mexico, and some areas in the United States, or of ayahuasca in the Santo
Daime and União de Vegetal religious groups.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Among U.S. adolescents, boys have greater 12-month prevalence rates of other hallucinogen use
than girls, and these gender differences extend to specific hallucinogens, including LSD,
MDMA, psilocybin, and salvia divinorum. Among U.S. adults, 60% of individuals with other
hallucinogen use disorder are men. International research suggests that women administered
MDMA may have greater subjective effects, such as altered state of consciousness, anxiety, and
depression. No information from international studies is available regarding gender differences
for other hallucinogen use disorder.
Diagnostic Markers
Laboratory testing can be useful in distinguishing among the different hallucinogens. However,
because some agents (e.g., LSD) are so potent that as little as 75 micrograms can produce severe
reactions, typical toxicological examination will not always reveal which substance has been
used.
Functional Consequences of Other Hallucinogen Use Disorder
Although insufficient information exists to clearly note the functional consequences of other
hallucinogen use disorder, complications of use of these substances have been
594
identified. Adverse effects of other hallucinogen use include those related to intoxication, such as
hyperthermia, cardiac tachyarrhythmias, pneumothorax hypernatremia, motor incoordination,
nystagmus, restlessness, hallucinations/delusions, mydriasis, increased alertness, and high blood
pressure. Other more serious reactions related to consequences of repeated use of other
hallucinogens include renal failure, hepatic failure, seizures, cerebral infarction, rhabdomyolysis,
