Other substance disorders.
Hallucinogen intoxication and hallucinogen-induced mental disorders.
Independent mental disorders.
cardiac complications, and hepatotoxicity.
There is evidence for persisting neurotoxic effects of MDMA/ecstasy use, including
impairments in memory, psychological function, and neuroendocrine function; serotonin system
dysfunction; and sleep disturbance; as well as adverse effects on brain microvasculature, white
matter maturation, and damage to axons.
Differential Diagnosis
The effects of hallucinogen use must be distinguished from those of
other substances (e.g., amphetamine use disorder, alcohol or sedative withdrawal), especially
because contamination of the hallucinogens with other drugs is relatively common.
Hallucinogen use disorder is
differentiated from hallucinogen intoxication and hallucinogen-induced mental disorders (e.g.,
hallucinogen-induced psychotic disorder) in that hallucinogen use disorder describes a
problematic pattern of hallucinogen use that involves impaired control over hallucinogen use,
social impairment attributable to hallucinogen use, risky hallucinogen use (e.g., driving while
intoxicated), and pharmacological symptoms (the development of tolerance), whereas
hallucinogen intoxication and hallucinogen-induced mental disorders describe psychiatric
syndromes that occur in the context of heavy use. Hallucinogen intoxication and hallucinogen-
induced mental disorders occur frequently in individuals with hallucinogen use disorder. In such
cases, a diagnosis of hallucinogen intoxication or a hallucinogen-induced mental disorder should
be given in addition to a diagnosis of hallucinogen use disorder, the presence of which is
indicated in the diagnostic code.
Some of the effects of hallucinogen use may resemble symptoms of
independent psychiatric disorders, such as schizophrenia and depressive and bipolar disorders.
Discerning whether symptoms occurred before the intake of the drug is important in the
differentiation of acute drug effects from a preexisting mental disorder. In particular,
schizophrenia should be ruled out, as some affected individuals (e.g., individuals with
schizophrenia who exhibit paranoia) may falsely attribute their symptoms to use of
hallucinogens.
Comorbidity
Other hallucinogen use disorder is highly associated with cocaine use disorder, stimulant use
disorder, other substance use disorder, tobacco (nicotine) use disorder, any personality disorder,
posttraumatic stress disorder, and panic attacks.
Phencyclidine Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recent use of phencyclidine (or a pharmacologically similar substance).
B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral changes (e.g., belligerence,
