assaultiveness, impulsiveness, unpredictability, psychomotor agitation, impaired
judgment) that developed during, or shortly after, phencyclidine use.
595
C. Within 1 hour, two (or more) of the following signs or symptoms:
Note: When the drug is smoked, “snorted,” or used intravenously, the onset may
be particularly rapid.
1. Vertical or horizontal nystagmus.
2. Hypertension or tachycardia.
3. Numbness or diminished responsiveness to pain.
4. Ataxia.
5. Dysarthria.
6. Muscle rigidity.
7. Seizures or coma.
8. Hyperacusis.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with
another substance.
Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether there is a comorbid
phencyclidine use disorder. If a mild phencyclidine use disorder is comorbid, the
ICD-10-CM code is F16.120, and if a moderate or severe phencyclidine use disorder
is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F16.220. If there is no comorbid phencyclidine
use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F16.920.
Note: In addition to the section “Functional Consequences of Phencyclidine
Intoxication,” see the corresponding section in Phencyclidine Use Disorder.
Diagnostic Features
Phencyclidine intoxication reflects the clinically significant behavioral changes that occur shortly
after ingestion of this substance (or a pharmacologically similar substance). The most common
clinical presentations of phencyclidine intoxication include disorientation; confusion without
hallucinations; nystagmus; numbness or diminished responsiveness to pain; ataxia; dysarthria;
muscle rigidity; hyperacusis; and coma of varying severity. Other clinically significant
behavioral changes associated with phencyclidine intoxication include violent behavior, extreme
agitation, persecutory delusions, euphoria, retrograde amnesia, and hypertension.
Prevalence
Use of phencyclidine or related substances (e.g., ketamine) may be taken as an estimate of the
prevalence of intoxication. Phencyclidine use is rare, with < 0.1% of the U.S. population age 12
and older reporting past 12-month use in 2018. In surveys of U.S. students and young adults
followed up from high school, past 12-month prevalence of ketamine use, which is assessed
