Other substance intoxication.
Phencyclidine-induced mental disorders.
Other medical conditions.
separately from other substances, was estimated at about 1.2% among 12th graders and 0.5%
among young adults, ages 19–28 years.
Diagnostic Markers
Laboratory testing may be useful, as phencyclidine is detectable in urine for up to 8 days
following use, although the levels are only weakly associated with an individual’s clinical
presentation and may therefore not be useful for case management. Creatine phosphokinase and
aspartate aminotransferase levels may be elevated.
Functional Consequences of Phencyclidine Intoxication
Phencyclidine intoxication produces extensive cardiovascular and neurological (e.g., seizures,
dystonias, dyskinesias, catalepsy, hypothermia or hyperthermia) toxicity.
596
Differential Diagnosis
In particular, in the absence of intact reality testing (i.e., without insight that the perceptual
abnormalities are drug induced), an additional diagnosis of phencyclidine-induced psychotic
disorder should be considered.
Phencyclidine intoxication should be differentiated from intoxication
due to other substances, including other hallucinogens; amphetamine, cocaine, or other
stimulants; and anticholinergics, as well as withdrawal from benzodiazepines. Nystagmus and
bizarre and violent behavior may distinguish intoxication due to phencyclidine from that due to
other substances. Toxicological tests may be useful in making this distinction. However, the
weak correlation between quantitative toxicology levels of phencyclidine and clinical
presentation may diminish the utility of the laboratory findings for patient management.
Phencyclidine 
intoxication 
is 
distinguished 
from
phencyclidine-induced mental disorders (e.g., phencyclidine-induced depressive disorder, with
onset during intoxication) because the symptoms (e.g., depressed mood) in the latter disorders
are in excess of those usually associated with phencyclidine intoxication, predominate in the
clinical presentation, and are severe enough to warrant clinical attention.
Medical conditions to be considered include certain metabolic disorders
like hypoglycemia and hyponatremia, central nervous system tumors, seizure disorders, sepsis,
neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and vascular insults.
Comorbidity
Given the typical overlap of phencyclidine intoxication with phencyclidine use disorder, see
“Comorbidity” under Phencyclidine Use Disorder for more details about co-occurring conditions
that are likely to be encountered.
Other Hallucinogen Intoxication
