Other substance intoxication.
Other conditions.
Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder.
The prevalence of other hallucinogen intoxication is not fully known but may be approximated
based on the prevalence of use of the substances. In 2018, 1.5% of individuals ages 12–17 years
in the United States reported use of hallucinogens in the past year; among individuals ages 18–
25, the rate was 6.9%, and among those age 26 or older, the rate was 1.3%. Rates were
consistently higher for boys and men than for girls and women in every age group.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Other hallucinogen intoxication may lead to increased suicidal thoughts or behavior, although
suicide is rare among individuals who use hallucinogens. Of note, a study of more than 135,000
randomly selected U.S. adults, including more than 19,000 individuals who use psychedelics, did
not find evidence, after adjustment for sociodemographics, other drug use, and childhood
depression, that lifetime psychedelic use is an independent risk factor for mental health
problems, suicidal thoughts, or suicide attempts. In addition, one large U.S. population survey
found that a lifetime history of hallucinogen use was associated with lower odds of mental
distress and suicidal thoughts or behavior, although a causal relationship between hallucinogenic
drugs and lower distress cannot be inferred from this study. On the basis of these findings, the
relationship of other hallucinogen use to suicidal thoughts and behaviors is uncertain.
Functional Consequences of Other Hallucinogen Intoxication
Other hallucinogen intoxication can have serious consequences. The perceptual disturbances and
impaired judgment associated with other hallucinogen intoxication can result in injuries or
fatalities from automobile crashes, physical fights, or unintentional self-injury (e.g., cuts or falls
from impaired depth perception). When other hallucinogens are consumed in combination with
other drugs (including alcohol), coma can occur, with the duration and profundity of coma
greater than when other hallucinogens are taken alone. Continued use of hallucinogens,
particularly MDMA, has also been linked with neurotoxic effects. Adverse effects of other
hallucinogen use include hyperthermia, cardiac tachyarrhythmias, pneumothorax hypernatremia,
motor incoordination, nystagmus, restlessness, hallucinations/delusions, mydriasis, increased
alertness, and high blood pressure. More serious reactions include renal failure, hepatic failure,
seizures, cerebral infarction, rhabdomyolysis, cardiac complications, and hepatotoxicity.
Differential Diagnosis
598
Other hallucinogen intoxication should be differentiated from
intoxication with amphetamine-type substances, cocaine, or other stimulants; anticholinergics,
inhalants, and phencyclidine. Toxicological tests are useful in making this distinction, and
determining the route of administration may also be useful.
Other disorders and conditions to be considered include schizophrenia,
depression, withdrawal from other drugs (e.g., sedatives, alcohol), certain metabolic disorders
(e.g., hypoglycemia), seizure disorders, tumors of the central nervous system, and vascular
insults.
Other hallucinogen intoxication is distinguished from
