Hallucinogen-induced mental disorders.
F16.983
hallucinogen persisting perception disorder because the symptoms in the latter continue
episodically or continuously for weeks (or longer) after the most recent intoxication.
Other hallucinogen intoxication is distinguished from
hallucinogen-induced mental disorders (e.g., hallucinogen-induced anxiety disorder, with onset
during intoxication) because the symptoms (e.g., anxiety) in these latter disorders are in excess
of those usually associated with other hallucinogen intoxication, predominate in the clinical
presentation, and are severe enough to warrant independent clinical attention.
Comorbidity
Given the typical overlap of other hallucinogen intoxication with other hallucinogen use
disorder, see “Comorbidity” under Other Hallucinogen Use Disorder for more details about co-
occurring conditions that are likely to be encountered.
Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Following cessation of use of a hallucinogen, the reexperiencing of one or more
of the perceptual symptoms that were experienced while intoxicated with the
hallucinogen (e.g., geometric hallucinations, false perceptions of movement in
the peripheral visual fields, flashes of color, intensified colors, trails of images of
moving objects, positive afterimages, halos around objects, macropsia and
micropsia).
B. The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition (e.g., anatomical
lesions and infections of the brain, visual epilepsies) and are not better explained
by another mental disorder (e.g., delirium, major neurocognitive disorder,
schizophrenia) or hypnopompic hallucinations.
Diagnostic Features
The hallmark of hallucinogen persisting perception disorder is the reexperiencing, when the
individual is sober, of the perceptual disturbances that were experienced while the individual was
intoxicated with the hallucinogen (Criterion A). The symptoms may include any perceptual
perturbations, but visual disturbances tend to be predominant. Typical of the abnormal visual
perceptions are geometric hallucinations, false perceptions of
599
movement in the peripheral visual fields, flashes of color, intensified colors, trails of images of
moving objects (i.e., images left suspended in the path of a moving object as seen in stroboscopic
