photography), perceptions of entire objects, visual snow, positive afterimages (i.e., a same-
colored or complementary-colored “shadow” of an object remaining after removal of the object),
halos around objects, or misperception of images as too large (macropsia) or too small
(micropsia). Duration of the visual disturbances may be episodic or nearly continuous and must
cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning (Criterion B). The disturbances may last for weeks, months, or years. Other
explanations for the disturbances (e.g., brain lesions, preexisting psychosis, seizure disorders,
migraine aura without headaches) must be ruled out (Criterion C).
Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder occurs primarily after LSD (lysergic acid
diethylamide) use, but not exclusively. There does not appear to be a strong correlation between
hallucinogen persisting perception disorder and number of occasions of hallucinogen use, with
some instances of hallucinogen persisting perception disorder occurring in individuals with
minimal exposure to hallucinogens. Some instances of hallucinogen persisting perception
disorder may be triggered by use of other substances (e.g., cannabis or alcohol), adaptation to
dark environments, exercise, and exposure to noise and photophobia.
Associated Features
Reality testing remains intact in individuals with hallucinogen persisting perception disorder
(i.e., the individual is aware that the disturbance is linked to the effect of the drug). If this is not
the case, another disorder might better explain the abnormal perceptions.
Prevalence
Prevalence estimates of hallucinogen persisting perception disorder are unknown. Initial
prevalence estimates of the disorder among individuals who use hallucinogens is approximately
4.2%.
Development and Course
Little is known about the development of hallucinogen persisting perception disorder. Its course,
as suggested by its name, is persistent, lasting for weeks, months, or even years in certain
individuals.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
There is little evidence regarding risk factors for hallucinogen persisting perception disorder,
although genetic factors have been suggested as a possible explanation underlying the
susceptibility to LSD effects in this condition.
Functional Consequences of Hallucinogen Persisting Perception
Disorder
Although hallucinogen persisting perception disorder remains a chronic condition in some cases,
many individuals with the disorder are able to suppress the disturbances and continue to function
normally.
Differential Diagnosis
