Conditions to be ruled out include schizophrenia, other drug effects, neurodegenerative
disorders, stroke, brain tumors, infections, and head trauma. Neuroimaging results in
hallucinogen persisting perception disorder cases are typically negative. As noted earlier, reality
testing remains intact (i.e., the individual is aware that the disturbance is linked to the
600
effect of the drug); if this is not the case, another disorder (e.g., psychotic disorder, another
medical condition) might better explain the abnormal perceptions.
Comorbidity
Common comorbid mental disorders accompanying hallucinogen persisting perception disorder
are panic disorder, alcohol use disorder, major depressive disorder, bipolar I disorder, and
schizophrenia spectrum disorders.
Phencyclidine-Induced Mental Disorders
Other phencyclidine-induced mental disorders are described in other chapters of the manual with
disorders with which they share phenomenology (see the substance/medication-induced mental
disorders in these chapters): phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder (“Schizophrenia Spectrum
and Other Psychotic Disorders”); phencyclidine-induced bipolar and related disorder (“Bipolar
and Related Disorders”); phencyclidine-induced depressive disorder (“Depressive Disorders”);
and phencyclidine-induced anxiety disorder (“Anxiety Disorders”). For phencyclidine-induced
intoxication delirium and delirium induced by ketamine taken as prescribed, see the criteria and
discussion of delirium in the chapter “Neurocognitive Disorders.” These phencyclidine-induced
mental disorders are diagnosed instead of phencyclidine intoxication only when the symptoms
are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention.
Hallucinogen-Induced Mental Disorders
The following other hallucinogen-induced mental disorders are described in other chapters of the
manual with disorders with which they share phenomenology (see the substance/medication-
induced mental disorders in these chapters): other hallucinogen–induced psychotic disorder
(“Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders”); other hallucinogen–induced bipolar
and related disorder (“Bipolar and Related Disorders”); other hallucinogen–induced depressive
disorder (“Depressive Disorders”); and other hallucinogen–induced anxiety disorder (“Anxiety
Disorders”). For other hallucinogen intoxication delirium and delirium induced by other
hallucinogens taken as prescribed, see the criteria and discussion of delirium in the chapter
“Neurocognitive Disorders.” These hallucinogen-induced mental disorders are diagnosed instead
of other hallucinogen intoxication only when the symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant
independent clinical attention.
Unspecified Phencyclidine-Related Disorder
