of the inhalant substance.
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the inhalant
substance, use it, or recover from its effects.
4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the inhalant substance.
5. Recurrent use of the inhalant substance resulting in a failure to fulfill major
role obligations at work, school, or home.
6. Continued use of the inhalant substance despite having persistent or
recurrent social or interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the
effects of its use.
7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
reduced because of use of the inhalant substance.
8. Recurrent use of the inhalant substance in situations in which it is physically
hazardous.
9. Use of the inhalant substance is continued despite knowledge of having a
persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have
been caused or exacerbated by the substance.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of the inhalant substance to
achieve intoxication or desired effect.
b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
the inhalant substance.
602
Specify the particular inhalant: When possible, the particular substance involved
should be named (e.g., “solvent use disorder”).
Specify if:
In early remission: After full criteria for inhalant use disorder were previously
met, none of the criteria for inhalant use disorder have been met for at least 3
months but for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4,
“Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the inhalant substance,” may be met).
In sustained remission: After full criteria for inhalant use disorder were
previously met, none of the criteria for inhalant use disorder have been met at
any time during a period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion
A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the inhalant substance,” may be
met).
Specify if:
In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
in an environment where access to inhalant substances is restricted.
Code based on current severity/remission: If an inhalant intoxication or another
inhalant-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use the codes below for
inhalant use disorder. Instead, the comorbid inhalant use disorder is indicated in the
