4th character of the inhalant-induced disorder code (see the coding note for inhalant
intoxication or a specific inhalant-induced mental disorder). For example, if there is
comorbid inhalant-induced depressive disorder and inhalant use disorder, only the
inhalant-induced depressive disorder code is given, with the 4th character indicating
whether the comorbid inhalant use disorder is mild, moderate, or severe: F18.14 for
mild inhalant use disorder with inhalant-induced depressive disorder or F18.24 for a
moderate or severe inhalant use disorder with inhalant-induced depressive disorder.
Specify current severity/remission:
F18.10 Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
F18.11 Mild, In early remission
F18.11 Mild, In sustained remission
F18.20 Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
F18.21 Moderate, In early remission
F18.21 Moderate, In sustained remission
F18.20 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
F18.21 Severe, In early remission
F18.21 Severe, In sustained remission
Specifiers
“In a controlled environment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is both
in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled environment
or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these environments are
closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.
The severity of individuals’ inhalant use disorder is assessed by the number of diagnostic
criteria endorsed. Changing severity of individuals’ inhalant use disorder across time is reflected
by reductions in the frequency (e.g., days used per month) and/or dose (e.g., tubes of glue per
day) used, as assessed by the individual’s self-report, report of others, clinician’s observations,
and biological testing (when practical).
Diagnostic Features
Examples of inhalant substances include volatile hydrocarbons, which comprise toxic gases from
glues, fuels, paints, and other volatile compounds. When possible, the
603
particular substance involved should be named (e.g., “toluene use disorder”). However, most
compounds that are inhaled are a mixture of several substances that can produce psychoactive
effects, and it is often difficult to ascertain the exact substance responsible for the disorder.
Unless there is clear evidence that a single, unmixed substance has been used, the general term
inhalant should be used in recording the diagnosis. Disorders arising from inhalation of nitrous
oxide or of amyl-, butyl-, or isobutylnitrite are considered as other (or unknown) substance use
