disorder.
Features of inhalant use disorder include repeated use of an inhalant substance despite the
individual’s knowing that the substance is causing serious problems for the individual (Criterion
A9). Those problems are reflected in the diagnostic criteria.
Missing work or school or inability to perform typical responsibilities at work or school
(Criterion A5), and continued use of the inhalant substance even though it causes arguments with
family or friends, fights, and other social or interpersonal problems (Criterion A6), may be seen
in inhalant use disorder. Limiting family contact, work or school obligations, or recreational
activities (e.g., sports, games, hobbies) may also occur (Criterion A7). Use of inhalants when
driving or operating dangerous equipment (Criterion A8) is also seen.
Tolerance (Criterion A10) is reported by about 10% of individuals who use inhalants.
Because a clinically significant withdrawal syndrome has not been established with inhalant use,
neither a diagnosis of inhalant withdrawal nor a corresponding diagnostic criterion for
withdrawal complaints for inhalant use disorder is included. However, withdrawal symptoms
may occur among inhalant users and individuals with moderate to severe inhalant use disorder,
and these symptoms appear to be similar in frequency to withdrawal symptoms among those
with moderate to severe cocaine use disorder.
Associated Features
A diagnosis of inhalant use disorder is supported by recurring episodes of intoxication with
negative results in standard drug screens (which do not detect inhalants); possession, or lingering
odors, of inhalant substances; peri-oral or peri-nasal “glue-sniffer’s rash”; association with other
individuals known to use inhalants; membership in groups with prevalent inhalant use (e.g.,
some native or aboriginal communities, homeless children in street gangs); easy access to certain
inhalant substances; paraphernalia possession; presence of the disorder’s characteristic medical
complications (e.g., brain white matter pathology, rhabdomyolysis); and the presence of multiple
other substance use disorders. Individuals with inhalant use disorder may present with symptoms
of pernicious anemia, subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord, major or mild
neurocognitive disorder, brain atrophy, leukoencephalopathy, and many other nervous system
disorders.
Prevalence
About 2.3% of American youth ages 12–17 years have used inhalants in the past 12 months, with
0.1% having a pattern of use that meets criteria for inhalant use disorder. Among U.S. adults, age
18 years and older, past 12-month prevalence of inhalant use is about 0.21%, with 0.04% having
a pattern of use that meets criteria for an inhalant use disorder. Among youth, the prevalence of
past 12-month inhalant use is highest among non-Hispanic Whites and individuals reporting
more than one racialized identity and lowest among American Indians/Alaska Natives. Twelve-
month prevalence rates of inhalant use and inhalant use disorder among adults are highest among
non-Hispanic Whites and lowest among non-Hispanic Blacks and American Indians/Alaska
Natives.
Development and Course
