Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
The declining prevalence in the United States of inhalant use and inhalant use disorder after
adolescence (from 2.3% during adolescence to 0.1% in early adulthood for inhalant use and from
0.1% to 0.04% for inhalant use disorder) indicates that the disorder usually
604
remits in early adulthood. Inhalant use disorder is rare in prepubertal children, most common in
adolescents and young adults, and uncommon in older persons. Calls to poison-control centers
for “intentional abuse” of inhalants peak with calls involving individuals at age 14 years. Those
with inhalant use disorder extending into adulthood demonstrate earlier onset of inhalant use, use
of multiple inhalants, and more frequent inhalant use.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Predictors of inhalant use disorder include sensation seeking and impulsivity.
Inhalant gases are widely and legally available, increasing the risk of misuse.
Childhood maltreatment or trauma also is associated with youthful progression from inhalant
non-use to inhalant use disorder.
Behavioral disinhibition is a highly heritable general propensity to not
constrain behavior in socially acceptable ways, to break social norms and rules, and to take
dangerous risks, pursuing rewards excessively despite dangers of adverse consequences. Youths
with strong behavioral disinhibition show risk factors for inhalant use disorder: early-onset
substance use disorder, multiple substance involvement, and early conduct problems. Because
behavioral disinhibition is under strong genetic influence, youths in families with substance use
and antisocial behaviors are at elevated risk for inhalant use disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Internationally, certain isolated Indigenous communities have experienced a high prevalence of
inhalant problems. Also, in some low- and middle-income countries, groups of homeless
children living on the streets have extensive inhalant use problems because of the effects of
poverty and the availability and affordability of the substances, and as a way to cope with
homelessness.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Although the past 12-month prevalence of inhalant use disorder in the United States is almost
identical among adolescent boys and girls, the disorder is very rare among adult women.
Diagnostic Markers
Urine, breath, or saliva tests may be valuable for assessing concurrent use of non-inhalant
substances by individuals with inhalant use disorder. However, technical problems and the
considerable expense of analyses make frequent biological testing for inhalants themselves
impractical.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
