Inhalant exposure (unintentional) from industrial or other accidents.
Inhalant intoxication, without meeting criteria for inhalant use disorder.
Inhalant intoxication meeting criteria for inhalant use disorder, and inhalant-induced mental
disorders.
Other substance use disorders, especially those involving sedating substances (e.g., alcohol,
benzodiazepines, barbiturates).
In the United States, adolescent and adult inhalant use and inhalant use disorder are associated
with suicidal thoughts and behavior, especially among individuals reporting symptoms of anxiety
and depression and histories of trauma.
Functional Consequences of Inhalant Use Disorder
Because of inherent toxicity, use of inhalants can be fatal. Death can occur from anoxia, cardiac
dysfunction, extreme allergic reaction, severe injury to the lungs, vomiting, accidents or injury,
or central nervous system depression. Moreover, any inhaled volatile hydrocarbons may produce
“sudden sniffing death” from cardiac arrhythmia. Inhalant use impairs neurobehavioral function
and causes various neurological, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and pulmonary problems.
605
Long-term inhalant users are at increased risk for tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS, sexually
transmitted diseases, depression, anxiety, bronchitis, asthma, and sinusitis.
Differential Diagnosis
A diagnosis of inhalant use
disorder only applies if the inhalant exposure is intentional.
Inhalant 
intoxication 
occurs
frequently during inhalant use disorder but also may occur among individuals whose use does
not meet criteria for inhalant use disorder.
Inhalant use disorder is differentiated from inhalant intoxication and inhalant-induced mental
disorders (e.g., inhalant-induced depressive disorder) in that inhalant use disorder describes a
problematic pattern of inhalant use that involves impaired control over inhalant use, social
impairment attributable to inhalant use, risky inhalant use (e.g., inhalant use despite medical
complications), and pharmacological symptoms (the development of tolerance), whereas inhalant
intoxication and inhalant-induced mental disorders describe psychiatric syndromes that develop
in the context of heavy use. Inhalant intoxication and inhalant-induced mental disorders occur
frequently in individuals with inhalant use disorder. In such cases, a diagnosis of inhalant
intoxication or an inhalant-induced mental disorder should be given in addition to a diagnosis of
inhalant use disorder, the presence of which is indicated in the diagnostic code.
Inhalant use disorder commonly co-occurs with other substance use disorders, and the symptoms
of the disorders may be similar and overlapping. To disentangle symptom patterns, it is helpful
to inquire about which symptoms persisted during periods when some of the substances were not
being used.
Comorbidity
Individuals with inhalant use disorder receiving clinical care often have numerous other
substance use, mood, anxiety, and personality disorders. Inhalant use disorder commonly co-
