Note: For information on Development and Course, Risk and Prognostic Factors,
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues, and Diagnostic Markers, see the corresponding
sections in Inhalant Use Disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of inhalant intoxication is the presence of clinically significant problematic
behavioral or psychological changes that develop during, or immediately after, intended or
unintended inhalation of a volatile hydrocarbon substance. When possible, the particular
substance involved should be named (e.g., toluene intoxication). Intoxication clears within a few
minutes to a few hours after the exposure ends. Thus, inhalant intoxication usually occurs in
brief episodes that may recur with further inhalant use.
Associated Features
Inhalant intoxication may be indicated by evidence of possession, or lingering odors, of inhalant
substances (e.g., glue, paint thinner, gasoline, butane lighters); other features may include
euphoria, relaxation, headache, rapid heartbeat, confusion, talkativeness, blurred vision, amnesia,
slurred speech, irritability, nausea, fatigue, burning in eyes or throat, grandiosity, chest pain,
auditory or visual hallucinations, and dissociation.
Prevalence
The prevalence of actual episodes of inhalant intoxication in the general population is unknown,
but it is probable that a majority of inhalant users would at some time exhibit behavioral or
psychological changes and symptoms that would meet criteria for inhalant intoxication.
Therefore, the prevalence of inhalant use and the prevalence of inhalant intoxication are likely
similar. In 2017, inhalant use in the past year was reported by 0.6% of all Americans older than
12 years; the prevalence was highest in younger age groups (2.3% for individuals ages 12 –17
years, 1.6% for individuals ages 18–25 years, and 0.3% for individuals age 26 and older).
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Gender differences in the prevalence of inhalant intoxication in the general population are
unknown. Regarding gender differences in the prevalence of inhalant use in the United
607
States, 0.8% of boys/men older than 12 years and 0.5% of girls/women older than 12 years have
used inhalants in the previous year, but in the younger age groups differences are minimal or
girls may have slightly higher prevalence (e.g., among adolescents ages 12–17 years, 2.4% of
girls and 2.2% of boys have used inhalants in the past year).
Functional Consequences of Inhalant Intoxication
Use of inhaled substances in a closed container, such as a plastic bag over the head, may lead to
unconsciousness, anoxia, and death. Separately, “sudden sniffing death,” likely from cardiac
arrhythmia or arrest, may occur with various volatile inhalants. The enhanced toxicity of certain
