Intoxication from other substances, especially from sedating substances (e.g., alcohol,
benzodiazepines, barbiturates).
Inhalant-induced mental disorders.
Other toxic, metabolic, traumatic, neoplastic, or infectious disorders that impair brain function
and cognition.
volatile inhalants, such as butane or propane, also causes fatalities. Although inhalant
intoxication itself is of short duration, it may produce persisting medical and neurological
problems, especially if the intoxications are frequent. Clinically significant correlates of inhalant
intoxication include reckless behaviors (e.g., taking foolish risks, getting into fights, having
unprotected sex), antisocial behaviors (cruelty, damaging property, arrests), and having serious
accidents.
Differential Diagnosis
These disorders may have similar signs and symptoms, but intoxication attributable to other
intoxicants may be identified via a toxicology screen. Differentiating the source of the
intoxication may involve discerning evidence of inhalant exposure as described for inhalant use
disorder. A diagnosis of inhalant intoxication may be suggested by possession or lingering odors
of inhalant substances (e.g., glue, paint thinner, gasoline, butane lighters); paraphernalia
possession (e.g., rags or bags for concentrating glue fumes); perioral or perinasal “glue-sniffer’s
rash”; reports from family or friends that the intoxicated individual possesses or uses inhalants;
or apparent intoxication despite negative results on standard drug screens (which usually fail to
identify inhalants).
Inhalant intoxication is distinguished from inhalant-induced
mental disorders (e.g., inhalant-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during intoxication) because
the symptoms (e.g., anxiety) in these latter disorders are in excess of those usually associated
with inhalant intoxication, predominate in the clinical presentation, and are severe enough to
warrant independent clinical attention.
Numerous neurological and other medical conditions may produce the clinically significant
behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., belligerence, assaultiveness, apathy, impaired
judgment) that also characterize inhalant intoxication.
Comorbidity
Given the typical overlap of inhalant intoxication with inhalant use disorder, see “Comorbidity”
under Inhalant Use Disorder for more details about co-occurring conditions that are likely to be
encountered.
Inhalant-Induced Mental Disorders
The following inhalant-induced mental disorders are described in other chapters of the manual
with disorders with which they share phenomenology (see the substance/medication-induced
mental disorders in these chapters): inhalant-induced psychotic disorder (“Schizophrenia
Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders”); inhalant-induced depressive
608
disorder (“Depressive Disorders”); inhalant-induced anxiety disorder (“Anxiety Disorders”); and
