4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use opioids.
5. Recurrent opioid use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at
work, school, or home.
6. Continued opioid use despite having persistent or recurrent social or
interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of opioids.
7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
reduced because of opioid use.
609
8. Recurrent opioid use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.
9. Continued opioid use despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent
physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or
exacerbated by the substance.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of opioids to achieve intoxication
or desired effect.
b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
an opioid.
Note: This criterion is not considered to be met for those taking opioids solely
under appropriate medical supervision.
11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
a. The characteristic opioid withdrawal syndrome (refer to Criteria A and B of
the criteria set for opioid withdrawal).
b. Opioids (or a closely related substance) are taken to relieve or avoid
withdrawal symptoms.
Note: This criterion is not considered to be met for those individuals taking
opioids solely under appropriate medical supervision.
Specify if:
In early remission: After full criteria for opioid use disorder were previously met,
none of the criteria for opioid use disorder have been met for at least 3 months
but for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a
strong desire or urge to use opioids,” may be met).
In sustained remission: After full criteria for opioid use disorder were previously
met, none of the criteria for opioid use disorder have been met at any time during
a period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or
a strong desire or urge to use opioids,” may be met).
Specify if:
On maintenance therapy: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
taking a prescribed agonist medication such as methadone or buprenorphine
and none of the criteria for opioid use disorder have been met for that class of
