medication (except tolerance to, or withdrawal from, the agonist). This category
also applies to those individuals being maintained on a partial agonist, an
agonist/antagonist, or a full antagonist such as oral naltrexone or depot
naltrexone.
In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
in an environment where access to opioids is restricted.
Code based on current severity/remission: If an opioid intoxication, opioid
withdrawal, or another opioid-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use the
codes below for opioid use disorder. Instead, the comorbid opioid use disorder is
indicated in the 4th character of the opioid-induced disorder code (see the coding
note for opioid intoxication, opioid withdrawal, or a specific opioid-induced mental
disorder). For example, if there is comorbid opioid-induced depressive disorder and
opioid use disorder, only the opioid-induced depressive disorder code is given, with
the 4th character indicating whether the comorbid opioid use disorder is mild,
moderate, or severe: F11.14 for mild opioid use disorder with opioid-induced
depressive disorder or F11.24 for a moderate or severe opioid use disorder with
opioid-induced depressive disorder.
Specify current severity/remission:
F11.10 Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
F11.11 Mild, In early remission
F11.11 Mild, In sustained remission
610
F11.20 Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
F11.21 Moderate, In early remission
F11.21 Moderate, In sustained remission
F11.20 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
F11.21 Severe, In early remission
F11.21 Severe, In sustained remission
Specifiers
The “on maintenance therapy” specifier applies as a further specifier of remission if the
individual is both in remission and receiving maintenance therapy. “In a controlled environment”
applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is both in remission and in a controlled
environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled environment or in sustained remission in a
controlled environment). Examples of these environments are closely supervised and substance-
free jails, therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.
Changing severity across time in an individual is also reflected by reductions in the
frequency (e.g., days of use per month) and/or dose (e.g., injections or number of pills) of an
opioid, as assessed by the individual’s self-report, report of knowledgeable others, clinician’s
