observations, and biological testing.
Diagnostic Features
The opioids include natural opioids (e.g., morphine, codeine), semisynthetics (e.g., heroin,
oxycodone, hydrocodone, hydromorphone, oxymorphone), and synthetics with morphine-like
action (e.g., methadone, meperidine, tramadol, fentanyl, carfentanil). Medications such as
pentazocine and buprenorphine that have both opiate agonist and antagonist effects are also
included in this class because, especially at lower doses, their agonist properties produce similar
physiological and behavioral effects as classic opioid agonists. Opioids are prescribed as
analgesics, anesthetics, antidiarrheal agents, or cough suppressants. Heroin is one of the most
commonly misused drugs of this class and is usually taken by injection, although it can be
smoked or “snorted,” especially when very pure heroin is available. Fentanyl is typically
injected, both medically and nonmedically, and is used medically in transdermal and
transmucosal formulations, whereas cough suppressants and antidiarrheal agents are taken orally.
The other opioids are generally taken both by injection and orally.
Opioid use disorder can arise from prescription opioids or illicit opioids (e.g., heroin and,
especially in recent years, fentanyl-related synthetic opioids). Opioid use disorder consists of
signs and symptoms reflecting compulsive, prolonged self-administration of opioid substances
either for a purpose other than a legitimate medical one or for use in a “non-medical” manner
(i.e., greatly exceeding the amount prescribed for a medical condition). For example, an
individual with adequate doses of prescribed analgesic opioid medication for pain relief who
uses significantly more of the medication than prescribed, and not only because of persistent
pain, is engaging in nonmedical opioid use and may have an opioid use disorder. Most
individuals with opioid use disorder have tolerance and experience withdrawal on abrupt
cessation or reduction in opioid use. Similar to processes that occur with other psychoactive
substances, individuals with opioid use disorder often develop conditioned responses to drug-
related stimuli (e.g., cue-reactive craving on seeing drug images or paraphernalia). These
responses probably contribute to relapse, are difficult to extinguish, and typically persist long
after withdrawal is completed.
Individuals with opioid use disorder tend to develop such regular patterns of compulsive drug
use that daily activities are planned around obtaining and administering
611
opioids. Prescription opioids used nonmedically can be obtained from family or friends, from
physicians by falsifying or exaggerating medical problems, by receiving simultaneous
prescriptions from several physicians, or via purchase on the illegal market. Health care
professionals with opioid use disorder can obtain opioids by writing prescriptions for themselves
or by diverting opioids that have been prescribed for individuals or from pharmacy supplies.
Associated Features
An attempt to achieve opioid intoxication may result in fatal or nonfatal opioid overdose. Opioid
overdose is characterized by unconsciousness, respiratory depression, and pinpoint pupils.
However, opioid overdoses can also occur in the absence of intoxication-seeking drug use.
