abstinence only in a minority. An exception occurred among U.S. soldiers who became
dependent on opioids while serving in the Vietnam War; over 90% had long-term abstinence
from opioids after returning to the United States, although many subsequently experienced
problems with alcohol, amphetamines, or suicidal thoughts or behavior.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
In addition to an association with more frequent nonmedical prescription opioid use, adult
prescription opioid use disorder is associated with most other substance use disorders. Opioid use
disorder is highly associated with externalizing traits such as novelty-seeking, impulsivity, and
disinhibition. Family, peer, and social environmental factors all increase the risk for opioid use
disorder. Family and twin studies also indicate a strong genetic contribution to the risk for opioid
use disorders, although identifying the specific genetic variants contributing to genetic risk has
been slow. Peer factors may relate to genetic predisposition in terms of how individuals select
their environments, including their peers.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Individuals from socially oppressed ethnoracial groups were historically overrepresented among
individuals with opioid use disorder. However, over time, opioid use disorder has become more
common among White individuals, suggesting that the widespread availability of opioids and
other social factors (e.g., changes in rates of poverty and unemployment) have an impact on
prevalence. Consistent with these factors, despite small variations between ethnoracial groups in
the psychometric performance of opioid use disorder criterion items, the criteria for opioid use
disorder perform equally well across ethnoracial groups.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Women with opioid use disorder appear more likely than men to have initiated opioid use in
response to sexual abuse and violence, and they are more likely than men to be introduced to the
drug by a partner. There is substantial evidence of telescoping among women in that they
progress to a use disorder more quickly than men after first use; women also appear to be more
ill when entering treatment facilities than are men, as noted in a large sample of heroin users in
Italy.
Diagnostic Markers
Routine urine toxicology test results are often positive for opioid drugs in individuals with opioid
use disorder. Urine test results remain positive for most opioids (e.g., heroin, morphine, codeine,
oxycodone, propoxyphene) for 12–36 hours after administration. Some opioids, such as fentanyl
and oxycodone, are not detected by standard urine tests (which test for morphine), but can be
identified by more specialized procedures for several days after use. Similarly, methadone and
buprenorphine (or buprenorphine/naloxone combinations) will not cause a positive result on
routine tests for opiates; they require specific tests that can detect these substances for several
days up to more than 1 week.
Although not specific markers of opioid use disorder, laboratory evidence of the presence of
other substances (e.g., cocaine, marijuana, alcohol, amphetamines, benzodiazepines) is common
