in heroin users. In addition, screening test results for hepatitis A, B, and C virus are often
positive in injection opioid users, either for hepatitis antigen (signifying active infection) or for
hepatitis antibody (signifying past infection). Mildly elevated liver
613
function test results are common, either as a result of resolving hepatitis or from toxic injury
to the liver due to contaminants that have been mixed with the injected opioid. HIV is also
prevalent in injection opioid users. Subtle changes in cortisol secretion patterns and body
temperature regulation have been observed for up to 6 months following opioid withdrawal.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Opioid use disorder is associated with a heightened risk for suicide attempts and suicide. Some
suicide risk factors overlap with risk factors for an opioid use disorder. In addition, repeated
opioid intoxication or withdrawal may be associated with severe depressions that although
temporary can be intense enough to lead to suicide attempts and suicide. Nonfatal accidental
opioid overdose and attempted suicide are distinct phenomena that can be difficult to
differentiate but should not be mistaken for each other, if possible.
Findings from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010 showed that among drugs of abuse,
suicide is a common cause of death among regular users of opioids. Evidence suggests that
suicides are undercounted or often misclassified in opioid-poisoning data. In a study of the
Veterans Health Administration (VHA) national medical records, after adjustment for psychiatric
comorbidity, opioid use disorder elevated the risk for suicide mortality, with greater increase in
risk among women than among men. In another study also using VHA national medical records,
among veterans prescribed opioids for chronic pain, suicide mortality increased with higher
opioid doses, even after demographic and clinical factors were taken into account. A follow-up
of a U.S. national cohort of adults with a history of an opioid overdose found that the
standardized mortality ratio (SMR; the ratio between the observed number of deaths in a study
population and the number of deaths that would be expected) was 25.9 for suicide, with a higher
SMR for women than for men. A review posited that the reasons for the increased risk for
suicide among opioid users were related to shared risk factors, namely, comorbid mental
disorders and pain.
Functional Consequences of Opioid Use Disorder
Physiologically, opioid use is associated with a lack of mucous membrane secretions, causing
dry mouth and nose. Slowing of gastrointestinal activity and a decrease in gut motility can
produce severe constipation. Visual acuity may be impaired as a result of pupillary constriction
with acute administration. In individuals who inject opioids, sclerosed veins (“tracks”) and
puncture marks on the lower portions of the upper extremities are common. Veins sometimes
become so severely sclerosed that peripheral edema develops, and individuals switch to injecting
in veins in the legs, neck, or groin. When these veins become unusable, individuals often inject
directly into their subcutaneous tissue (“skin-popping”), resulting in cellulitis, abscesses, and
circular-appearing scars from healed skin lesions. Tetanus and Clostridium botulinum infections
are rare but serious consequences of injecting opioids, especially with contaminated needles.
