Opioid intoxication, opioid withdrawal, and opioid-induced mental disorders.
Infections may also occur in other organs and include bacterial endocarditis, hepatitis, and HIV
infection. Hepatitis C infections, for example, may occur in up to 90% of individuals who inject
opioids. In addition, the prevalence of HIV infection is high among individuals who inject drugs,
a large proportion of whom are individuals with opioid use disorder. For example, HIV infection
rates are as high as 60% among heroin users in some areas of the United States and the Russian
Federation. However, the incidence may be much lower in areas where access to clean injection
material and paraphernalia is facilitated.
Tuberculosis is a particularly serious problem among individuals who use drugs
intravenously, especially those who are dependent on heroin; infection is usually asymptomatic
and evident only by the presence of a positive tuberculin skin test or tuberculosis blood test
(interferon gamma release assay). However, many cases of active tuberculosis have been found,
especially among those who are infected with HIV. These individuals
614
often have a newly acquired infection but also are likely to experience reactivation of a prior
infection because of impaired immune function.
Individuals who sniff heroin or other opioids into the nose (insufflation, or “snorting”) often
develop irritation of the nasal mucosa, sometimes accompanied by perforation of the nasal
septum. Difficulties in sexual functioning are common. Males often experience erectile
dysfunction during intoxication or chronic use. Females commonly have disturbances of
reproductive function and irregular menses.
Although acute opioid use produces analgesia, chronic use can produce hyperalgesia (opioid-
induced hyperalgesia), a condition characterized by increased sensitivity to pain. Physiological
dependence on opioids may occur in about half of the infants born to females with opioid use
disorder. This can produce a severe withdrawal syndrome in the neonate requiring medical
treatment and has increased markedly in prevalence.
The mortality rate in individuals with opioid use disorder is 6–20 times greater than in the
general population. Fatal overdoses due to prescription opioids increased dramatically in the
United States since 1999, with almost 400,000 such deaths occurring since then, and the rate of
such overdoses is now five times higher than in 1999. Fatal overdoses due to heroin began a
sharp increase in 2010, and since 2013, fatal overdoses due to synthetic opioids (e.g., fentanyl)
increased so sharply that these rates were almost double the rates for prescription opioid or
heroin overdoses by 2017. Nonfatal opioid overdoses resulting in hospitalization and emergency
department visits have increased as well. Although not all risk factors for opioid use disorder and
opioid overdose are the same, substantial overlap exists, making the risk for overdose one of the
most serious potential consequences of opioid use disorder. Individuals with opioid use disorder
are also at increased risk for mortality from many medical conditions (e.g., hepatitis, HIV
infection, tuberculosis, cardiovascular disease). Death can also result from accidents, injuries, or
other general medical complications.
Differential Diagnosis
Opioid use disorder is
differentiated from opioid intoxication, opioid withdrawal, and opioid-induced mental disorders
