Other substance intoxication.
Other withdrawal disorders.
Independent mental disorders.
(e.g., opioid-induced depressive disorder) in that opioid use disorder describes a problematic
pattern of opioid use that involves impaired control over opioid use, social impairment
attributable to opioid use, risky opioid use (e.g., continued opioid use despite medical
complications), and pharmacological symptoms (the development of tolerance or withdrawal),
whereas opioid intoxication, opioid withdrawal, and opioid-induced mental disorders describe
psychiatric syndromes that occur in the context of heavy use. Opioid intoxication, opioid
withdrawal, and opioid-induced mental disorders occur frequently in individuals with opioid use
disorder. In such cases, a diagnosis of opioid intoxication, opioid withdrawal, or opioid-induced
mental disorder should be given in addition to a diagnosis of opioid use disorder, the presence of
which is indicated in the diagnostic code.
Alcohol intoxication and sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
intoxication can cause a clinical picture that resembles that of opioid intoxication. A diagnosis of
alcohol or sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication can usually be made based on the
absence of pupillary constriction or the lack of a response to naloxone challenge. In some cases,
intoxication may be due both to opioids and to alcohol or other sedatives. In these cases, the
naloxone challenge will not reverse all of the sedative effects.
The anxiety and restlessness associated with opioid withdrawal
resemble symptoms seen in sedative-hypnotic withdrawal. However, opioid withdrawal is also
accompanied by rhinorrhea, lacrimation, and pupillary dilation, which are not seen in sedative-
type withdrawal. Dilated pupils are also seen in hallucinogen intoxication and stimulant
intoxication. However, other signs or symptoms of opioid
615
withdrawal, such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, rhinorrhea, or lacrimation,
are not present.
Some of the effects of opioid use may resemble symptoms (e.g.,
depressed mood) of an independent mental disorder (e.g., persistent depressive disorder).
Opioids are less likely to produce symptoms of mental disturbance than are most other drugs of
abuse.
Comorbidity
Other than overdose, the most common medical comorbidities associated with opioid use
disorder are viral (e.g., HIV, hepatitis C virus) and bacterial infections, particularly among
injection heroin users. These infections are less common in prescription opioid use disorder.
Research with nationally representative samples of the U.S. population has found that opioid
use disorder is often associated with other substance use disorders, especially those involving
tobacco, alcohol, cannabis, stimulants, and benzodiazepines. Individuals with opioid use disorder
are at risk for the development of persistent depressive disorder or major depressive disorder.
These symptoms may represent an opioid-induced depressive disorder or an exacerbation of a
preexisting independent depressive disorder. Periods of depression are especially common
during chronic intoxication or in association with physical or psychosocial stressors related to the
opioid use disorder. Insomnia is also common, especially during withdrawal. Opioid use disorder
is also associated with bipolar I disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, and antisocial, borderline,
