and schizotypal personality disorders. A history of conduct disorder in childhood or adolescence
has also been identified as a significant risk factor for substance-related disorders, especially
opioid use disorder. Further, prescription opioid use disorder and heroin use disorder are
generally associated with serious mental illness, defined as a mental disorder other than a
substance use disorder that results in serious functional impairment substantially limiting or
interfering with major life activities.
Opioid Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recent use of an opioid.
B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., initial
euphoria followed by apathy, dysphoria, psychomotor agitation or retardation,
impaired judgment) that developed during, or shortly after, opioid use.
C. Pupillary constriction (or pupillary dilation due to anoxia from severe overdose)
and one (or more) of the following signs or symptoms developing during, or
shortly after, opioid use:
1. Drowsiness or coma.
2. Slurred speech.
3. Impairment in attention or memory.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with
another substance.
Specify if:
With perceptual disturbances: This specifier may be noted in the rare instance
in which hallucinations with intact reality testing or auditory, visual, or tactile
illusions occur in the absence of a delirium.
616
Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid
opioid use disorder and whether or not there are perceptual disturbances.
For opioid intoxication, without perceptual disturbances: If a mild opioid use
disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F11.120, and if a moderate or
severe opioid use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F11.220. If there
is no comorbid opioid use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F11.920.
For opioid intoxication, with perceptual disturbances: If a mild opioid use
disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F11.122, and if a moderate or
severe opioid use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F11.222. If there
is no comorbid opioid use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F11.922.
