Other substance intoxication.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of opioid intoxication is the presence of clinically significant problematic
behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., initial euphoria followed by apathy, dysphoria,
psychomotor agitation or retardation, impaired judgment) that develop during, or shortly after,
opioid use (Criteria A and B). Intoxication is accompanied by pupillary constriction (unless there
has been a severe overdose with consequent anoxia and pupillary dilation) and one or more of
the following signs: drowsiness (described as being “on the nod”), slurred speech, and
impairment in attention or memory (Criterion C); drowsiness may progress to coma. Individuals
with opioid intoxication may demonstrate inattention to the environment, even to the point of
ignoring potentially harmful events. The signs or symptoms of opioid intoxication must not be
attributable to another medical condition and are not better explained by another mental disorder
(Criterion D).
Up to 2009, opioid overdoses were mainly due to prescribed opioids, but starting in 2010,
overdoses due to heroin began a sharp rise, and additionally, since 2015, fatal overdoses due to
synthetic opioids other than methadone (generally fentanyl) have outnumbered overdoses due to
prescribed opioids.
Associated Features
Opioid intoxication can include decreases in respiratory rate and blood pressure, and mild
hypothermia. The duration of opioid intoxication can vary as a function of the pharmacokinetics
of the opioid ingested. Opioid intoxication may result in fatal or nonfatal opioid overdose.
Opioid overdose is characterized by unconsciousness, respiratory depression, and pinpoint
pupils. Fatal opioid overdoses have increased exponentially in the United States since 1999.
Development and Course
Opioid intoxication can occur in an individual who is opioid naïve, an individual who uses
opioids sporadically, and an individual who is physically dependent on opioids. The dose of
opioid consumed relative to the likelihood of experiencing opioid intoxication will vary as a
function of the status and history of the individual’s opioid exposure (i.e., tolerance). Individuals
often report that the qualitative pleasurable experience of opioid intoxication diminishes after
repeated use of an opioid.
Differential Diagnosis
Alcohol intoxication and sedative-hypnotic intoxication can cause a
clinical picture that resembles opioid intoxication. A diagnosis of alcohol or sedative-hypnotic
intoxication can usually be made based on the absence of pupillary constriction or the lack of a
response to a naloxone challenge. In some cases, intoxication may be due both to opioids and to
alcohol or other sedatives. In these cases, naloxone administration will not reverse all of the
sedative effects. While response to administration of
617
