opioid use disorder. If a mild opioid use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is
F11.13, and if a moderate or severe opioid use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM
code is F11.23. For opioid withdrawal occurring in the absence of an opioid use
disorder (e.g., in a patient taking opioids solely under appropriate medical
supervision), the ICD-10-CM code is F11.93.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of opioid withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal
syndrome that develops after the cessation of (or reduction in) prolonged opioid use
618
(Criterion A1). The opioids used may be illicit or licitly obtained drugs prescribed to treat pain.
A withdrawal syndrome can also be precipitated by administration of an opioid antagonist (e.g.,
naloxone, naltrexone, nalmefene) after a period of opioid use (Criterion A2); it can also occur
after administration of an opioid partial agonist (e.g., buprenorphine) to an individual currently
using a full opioid agonist.
Opioid withdrawal has a characteristic pattern of signs and symptoms. The first of these are
subjective and consist of complaints of anxiety, restlessness, and an “achy feeling” that is often
located in the back and legs, along with irritability and increased sensitivity to pain. Three or
more of the following must be present to make a diagnosis of opioid withdrawal: dysphoric
mood; nausea or vomiting; muscle aches; lacrimation or rhinorrhea; pupillary dilation,
piloerection, or increased sweating; diarrhea; yawning; fever; and insomnia (Criterion B).
Piloerection and fever are associated with more severe withdrawal and are not often seen in
routine clinical practice because individuals with opioid use disorder usually obtain substances
before withdrawal becomes that far advanced. These symptoms of opioid withdrawal must cause
clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms must not be attributable to another medical condition
and are not better explained by another mental disorder (Criterion D). Having symptoms that
meet diagnostic criteria for opioid withdrawal alone is not sufficient for a diagnosis of opioid use
disorder, but concurrent symptoms of craving and drug-seeking behavior are suggestive of
comorbid opioid use disorder.
Associated Features
Opioid withdrawal may occur in any individual after cessation of repeated use of an opioid,
whether in the setting of medical management of pain, during opioid agonist therapy for opioid
use disorder, in the context of illicit use, or following attempts to self-treat symptoms of mental
disorders with opioids. Opioid withdrawal is a distinct condition from opioid addiction or opioid
use disorder and does not necessarily require the drug-seeking behaviors associated with opioid
use disorder to be diagnosed. Thus, opioid withdrawal may occur in individuals without opioid
use disorder and should not be confused with it. Males with opioid withdrawal may experience
piloerection, sweating, and spontaneous ejaculations while awake.
Prevalence
