Other withdrawal disorders.
Other substance intoxication.
Opioid-induced mental disorders.
Among individuals from various U.S. clinical settings, opioid withdrawal occurred in 60% of
individuals who had used heroin at least once in the prior 12 months. Individuals regularly using
opioids (e.g., prescription opioids for pain, illicit opioids) for a period of time are at risk for
developing physical dependence, including withdrawal, on cessation or marked reduction in use.
Development and Course
The speed and severity of withdrawal associated with opioids depend on the half-life of the
opioid used. Most individuals who are physiologically dependent on short-acting drugs such as
heroin begin to have withdrawal symptoms within 6–12 hours after the last dose. Symptoms may
take 2–4 days to emerge in the case of longer-acting drugs such as methadone or buprenorphine.
Acute withdrawal symptoms for a short-acting opioid such as heroin usually peak within 1–3
days and gradually subside over a period of 5–7 days. More chronic symptoms (e.g., anxiety,
dysphoria, anhedonia, craving, insomnia) can last for weeks to months. The severity of opioid
withdrawal also varies depending on the duration of opioid use. Opioid withdrawal symptoms
among individuals receiving long-term prescription opioid treatment for pain can be minimized
by tapering the drug slowly.
619
Among those with an opioid use disorder, opioid withdrawal and attempts to relieve
withdrawal are typical. The course of withdrawal can be part of an escalating pattern in which an
opioid is used to reduce withdrawal symptoms, in turn leading to recurrent episodes of
withdrawal at a later time.
Differential Diagnosis
The anxiety and restlessness associated with opioid withdrawal
resemble symptoms seen in sedative-hypnotic withdrawal. However, opioid withdrawal is also
accompanied by rhinorrhea, lacrimation, and pupillary dilation, which are not seen in sedative-
type withdrawal.
Dilated pupils are also seen in hallucinogen intoxication and
stimulant intoxication. However, other signs or symptoms of opioid withdrawal, such as nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, rhinorrhea, and lacrimation, are not present.
Opioid withdrawal is distinguished from opioid-induced mental
disorders (e.g., opioid-induced depressive disorder, with onset during withdrawal) because the
symptoms (e.g., depressed mood) in these latter disorders are in excess of those usually
associated with opioid withdrawal, predominate in the clinical presentation, and are severe
enough to warrant clinical attention.
Comorbidity
Given the typical overlap of opioid withdrawal with opioid use disorder, see “Comorbidity”
under Opioid Use Disorder for more details about co-occurring conditions that are likely to be
encountered.
