A. A problematic pattern of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use leading to clinically
significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of the following,
occurring within a 12-month period:
1. Sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics are often taken in larger amounts or over
a longer period than was intended.
2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use.
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic; use the sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic; or recover
from its effects.
4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic.
5. Recurrent sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use resulting in a failure to fulfill
major role obligations at work, school, or home (e.g., repeated absences from
work or poor work performance related to sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
use; sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-related absences, suspensions, or
expulsions from school; neglect of children or household).
6. Continued sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use despite having persistent or
recurrent social or interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the
effects of sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics (e.g., arguments with a spouse
about consequences of intoxication; physical fights).
7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
reduced because of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use.
8. Recurrent sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use in situations in which it is
physically hazardous (e.g., driving an automobile or operating a machine
when impaired by sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use).
9. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use is continued despite knowledge of having
a persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to
have been caused or exacerbated by the sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of the sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic to achieve intoxication or desired effect.
b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
the sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic.
621
Note: This criterion is not considered to be met for individuals taking
sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics under medical supervision.
11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for sedatives, hypnotics, or
anxiolytics (refer to Criteria A and B of the criteria set for sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal).
