b. Sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics (or a closely related substance, such
as alcohol) are taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms.
Note: This criterion is not considered to be met for individuals taking
sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics under medical supervision.
Specify if:
In early remission: After full criteria for sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use
disorder were previously met, none of the criteria for sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic use disorder have been met for at least 3 months but for less than 12
months (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge
to use the sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic,” may be met).
In sustained remission: After full criteria for sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
use disorder were previously met, none of the criteria for sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic use disorder have been met at any time during a period of 12 months
or longer (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or
urge to use the sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic,” may be met).
Specify if:
In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
in an environment where access to sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics is
restricted.
Code based on current severity/remission: If a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; or another sedative-,
hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use the codes
below for sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder. Instead, the comorbid
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder is indicated in the 4th character of the
sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced disorder (see the coding note for sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; or
specific sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disorder). For example, if
there is comorbid sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced depressive disorder and
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder, only the sedative-, hypnotic-, or
anxiolytic-induced depressive disorder code is given, with the 4th character
indicating whether the comorbid sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder is mild,
moderate, or severe: F13.14 for mild sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder
with sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced depressive disorder or F13.24 for a
moderate or severe sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder with sedative-,
hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced depressive disorder.
Specify current severity/remission:
F13.10 Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
F13.11 Mild, In early remission
F13.11 Mild, In sustained remission
F13.20 Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
F13.21 Moderate, In early remission
