F13.21 Moderate, In sustained remission
F13.20 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
F13.21 Severe, In early remission
F13.21 Severe, In sustained remission
622
Specifiers
“In a controlled environment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is both
in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled environment
or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these environments are
closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.
Diagnostic Features
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic substances include benzodiazepines, benzodiazepine-like drugs
(e.g., zolpidem, zaleplon), carbamates (e.g., glutethimide, meprobamate), barbiturates (e.g.,
secobarbital), and barbiturate-like hypnotics (e.g., glutethimide, methaqualone, propofol). This
class of substances includes most prescription sleeping medications and most prescription
antianxiety medications. Nonbenzodiazepine antianxiety agents (e.g., buspirone, gepirone) are
not included in this class because they do not appear to be associated with significant misuse.
Like 
alcohol, 
these 
agents 
are 
brain 
depressants 
and 
can 
produce 
similar
substance/medication-induced and substance use disorders. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
substances are available both by prescription and illegally. Some individuals who obtain these
substances by prescription will develop a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder, while
others who misuse these substances or use them for intoxication will not develop a use disorder.
In particular, sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics with rapid onset or short to intermediate lengths
of action may be taken for intoxication purposes, although longer-acting substances in this class
may be taken for intoxication as well.
Craving (Criterion A4), either during periods of active use or during periods of abstinence, is
a typical feature of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder. Misuse of substances from this
class may occur in conjunction with use of other substances. For example, individuals may use
intoxicating doses of sedatives or benzodiazepines to “come down” from cocaine or
amphetamines or use high doses of benzodiazepines in combination with methadone to “boost”
its effects.
Repeated absences or poor work performance, school absences, suspensions or expulsions,
and neglect of children or household (Criterion A5) may be related to sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic use disorder; the continued use of the substances despite arguments with a spouse
about consequences of intoxication or despite physical fights (Criterion A6) may also occur.
Limiting contact with family or friends, avoiding work or school, or stopping participation in
hobbies, sports, or games (Criterion A7) and recurrent sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use when
driving an automobile or operating machinery when impaired by such use (Criterion A8) are also
seen in sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder.
Very significant levels of tolerance and withdrawal can develop to sedative, hypnotic, or
