anxiolytic substances. There may be evidence of tolerance and withdrawal in the absence of a
diagnosis of a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder in an individual who has abruptly
discontinued use of benzodiazepines that were taken for long periods of time at prescribed and
therapeutic doses. In these cases, an additional diagnosis of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use
disorder is made only if other criteria are met. That is, sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
medications may be prescribed for appropriate medical purposes, and depending on the dose
regimen, these drugs may then produce tolerance and withdrawal. If these drugs are prescribed or
recommended for appropriate medical purposes, and if they are used as prescribed, the resulting
tolerance or withdrawal does not count toward the diagnosis of a substance use disorder.
However, it is necessary to determine whether the drugs were inappropriately prescribed and
used (e.g., falsifying medical symptoms to obtain the medication; using more medication than
prescribed; obtaining the medication from several doctors without informing them).
Given the unidimensional nature of the symptoms of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use
disorder, severity is based on the number of criteria endorsed.
623
Associated Features
Research with nationally representative samples of the U.S. population has found that sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder is often associated with other substance use disorders (e.g.,
alcohol, cannabis, opioid, stimulant use disorders). Sedatives are often used to alleviate the
unwanted effects of these other substances. With repeated use of the sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic, tolerance develops to the sedative effects, and a progressively higher dose is used.
However, tolerance to brain stem depressant effects develops much more slowly, and as the
individual takes more substance to achieve euphoria or other desired effects, there may be a
sudden onset of respiratory depression and hypotension, which may result in death. Intense or
repeated sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication may be associated with severe depression
that although temporary can lead to suicide attempt and suicide.
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence of DSM-IV sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder in the United
States is estimated to be 0.3% among adolescents ages 12–17 years and adults age 18 years and
older, and this prevalence has remained stable nationally despite increases in rates of prescription
of these medications. Rates of DSM-IV sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder in the
United States have not been shown to vary consistently by gender, but data from other countries
have generally found higher rates among girls and women than boys and men. The 12-month
prevalence of DSM-IV sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder in the United States
decreases as a function of age and is greatest among individuals ages 18–29 years (0.5%) and
lowest among individuals 65 years and older (0.04%).
Twelve-month prevalence of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use, misuse (e.g., use without a
prescription), or disorder varies across U.S. ethnoracial groups. For instance, 12-month
prevalence estimates for sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic misuse across ethnoracial groups range
from 0.6% to 2.5% for adolescents ages 12–17 years and 0.7% to 10.1% for adults.
