Temperamental.
Environmental.
Development and Course
The usual course of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder involves individuals in their
teens or 20s who escalate their occasional use of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic agents to the
point at which they develop problems that meet criteria for a diagnosis. This pattern may be
especially likely among individuals who have other substance use disorders (e.g., alcohol,
opioids, stimulants). An initial pattern of intermittent use socially (e.g., at parties) can lead to
daily use and high levels of tolerance. Once this occurs, an increasing level of interpersonal
difficulties can be expected, as well as increasingly severe episodes of cognitive dysfunction and
physiological withdrawal.
The second and less frequently observed clinical course begins with an individual who
originally obtained the medication by prescription from a physician, usually for the treatment of
anxiety, insomnia, or somatic complaints. As either tolerance or a need for higher doses of the
medication develops, there is a gradual increase in the dose and frequency of self-administration.
The individual is likely to continue to justify use on the basis of original anxiety or insomnia
symptoms, but substance-seeking behavior becomes more prominent, and the individual may
seek out multiple physicians to obtain sufficient supplies of the medication. Tolerance can reach
high levels, and withdrawal (including seizures and withdrawal delirium) may occur.
As with many substance use disorders, sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder
generally has an onset during adolescence or early adult life. Although the risk for misuse and
use disorder decreases with age after about age 30, side effects associated with psychoactive
substances may increase as individuals age. In particular, cognitive impairment increases as a
side effect with age, and the metabolism of sedatives, hypnotics, or
624
anxiolytics decreases with age among older individuals. Both acute and chronic toxic effects
of these substances, especially effects on cognition, memory, and motor coordination, are likely
to increase with age as a consequence of pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic age-related
changes. Individuals with major neurocognitive disorder are more likely to develop intoxication
and impaired physiological functioning at lower doses. Because sedatives, hypnotics, and
anxiolytics are often used in combination with other psychoactive substances, it can be difficult
to ascertain whether the functional consequences are attributable to a single substance (e.g.,
sedative) or to the use of multiple substances.
Deliberate intoxication to achieve a “high” is most likely to be observed in teenagers and
individuals in their 20s. Problems associated with sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics are also
seen in individuals in their 40s and older who escalate the dose of prescribed medications. In
older individuals, intoxication can resemble a progressive major neurocognitive disorder.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Impulsivity and novelty seeking are individual temperaments that relate to the
propensity to develop a substance use disorder but may themselves be genetically determined.
Personality disorders can also increase the risk of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic misuse or use
disorder.
Because sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics are all medications, a key risk factor
