Genetic and physiological.
Course modifiers.
relates to availability of the substances, both through an individual’s own prescriptions and from
prescriptions dispensed to family and friends. In the United States, the historical patterns of
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic misuse relate to broad prescribing patterns. For instance, a
marked decrease in prescription of barbiturates was associated with an increase in
benzodiazepine prescriptions. Peer factors may relate to genetic predisposition in terms of how
individuals select their environment. Other individuals at heightened risk might include those
with alcohol use disorder who may receive repeated prescriptions in response to their complaints
of alcohol-related anxiety or insomnia.
As with other substance use disorders, the risk for sedative, hypnotic,
or anxiolytic use disorder has been found in U.S.-based twin registry studies to be related to
individual, family, peer, social, and environmental factors. Within these domains, genetic factors
play a particularly important role both directly and indirectly. Overall, across development,
genetic factors seem to play a larger role in the onset of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use
disorder as individuals age through puberty into adult life.
In nationally representative U.S. studies, early onset of use is associated with
greater likelihood for developing a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Prescription patterns (and availability) of this class of substances vary across countries and
populations, which may lead to variations in prevalence of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use
disorder. In the United States, use of benzodiazepines has been more frequently reported by non-
Latinx Whites than Latinx or African Americans. However, risk of the disorder may vary within
populations exposed to these substances. For example, the 12-month prevalence of DSM-IV
benzodiazepine use disorder among U.S. individuals who used benzodiazepines was higher
among African Americans (3.0%) and non-Latinx “others” (2.6%) than among non-Latinx
Whites (1.3%).
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Although estimates from individual studies vary, there appear to be no gender differences in the
prevalence of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder.
625
Diagnostic Markers
Almost all sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic substances can be identified through laboratory
evaluations of urine or blood (the latter of which can quantify the amounts of these agents in the
body). Urine test results are likely to remain positive for up to approximately 1 week after the
use of long-acting substances, such as diazepam or flurazepam.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
U.S. epidemiological studies show that hypnotics are associated with suicide, but it is unclear if
this association is attributable to underlying psychiatric conditions such as depression and
insomnia, which are themselves risk factors for suicide.
