Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; and
sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disorders.
Functional Consequences of Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Use
Disorder
The social and interpersonal consequences of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder
mimic those of alcohol in terms of the potential for disinhibited behavior. Accidents,
interpersonal difficulties, and interference with work or school performance are common
outcomes. The disinhibiting effects of these agents, like alcohol, may potentially contribute to
overly aggressive behavior and arguments or fights, with subsequent interpersonal and legal
problems. Physical examination is likely to reveal evidence of a mild decrease in most aspects of
autonomic nervous system functioning, including a slower pulse, a slightly decreased respiratory
rate, and a slight drop in blood pressure (most likely to occur with postural changes).
Acute intoxication can result in accidental injuries and automobile accidents. There may be
consequences of trauma (e.g., internal bleeding, a subdural hematoma) from accidents that occur
while intoxicated. For elderly individuals, even short-term use of these sedating medications at
prescribed doses may be associated with an increased risk for cognitive problems and falls. The
association of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic medications with increased risk of major
neurocognitive disorder remains unclear.
At high doses, sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic substances can be lethal, particularly when
mixed with other central nervous system depressants, such as opioids or alcohol, although the
lethal dosage varies considerably among the specific substances. Intravenous use of these
substances can result in medical complications related to the use of contaminated needles (e.g.,
hepatitis, HIV).
Accidental or deliberate overdoses, similar to those observed for alcohol use disorder or
repeated alcohol intoxication, can occur. Overdoses may be associated with a deterioration in
vital signs that signals an impending medical emergency (e.g., respiratory arrest from
barbiturates). In contrast to their wide margin of safety when used alone, benzodiazepines taken
in combination with opioids and alcohol can be particularly dangerous, and accidental overdoses
are reported commonly in U.S. data. Accidental overdoses have also been reported in individuals
who deliberately misuse barbiturates and other nonbenzodiazepine sedatives (e.g.,
methaqualone), but because these agents are much less available than the benzodiazepines, the
frequency of overdosing is low in most settings.
Differential Diagnosis
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder is differentiated from sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; and sedative-, hypnotic-, or
anxiolytic-induced mental disorders (e.g., sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced depressive
disorder) in that sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder describes a problematic pattern
626
of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use that involves impaired control over such use; social
impairment attributable to this use; risky sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use (e.g., driving while
intoxicated); and pharmacological symptoms (the development of tolerance or withdrawal);
whereas sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
