Other medical conditions.
Alcohol use disorder.
Clinically appropriate use of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic medications.
withdrawal; and sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disorders describe psychiatric
syndromes that occur in the context of heavy use. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication;
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; and sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced
mental disorders occur frequently in individuals with sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use
disorder. In such cases, a diagnosis of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication; sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; or a sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental
disorder should be given in addition to a diagnosis of sedative, hypnotic, and anxiolytic use
disorder, the presence of which is indicated in the diagnostic code.
The slurred speech, incoordination, and other associated features
characteristic of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication could be the result of another
medical condition (e.g., multiple sclerosis) or of a prior head trauma (e.g., a subdural hematoma).
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder must be differentiated from
alcohol use disorder. The differential diagnosis is determined mostly through clinical history,
although liver damage and other potential signs of chronic alcohol toxicity (e.g.,
cardiomyopathy) can also be more suggestive of alcohol use disorder than of sedative, hypnotic,
or anxiolytic use disorder.
Individuals may continue to
take benzodiazepine medication according to a physician’s direction for a legitimate medical
indication over extended periods of time. Even if physiological signs of tolerance or withdrawal
are manifested, many of these individuals do not develop symptoms that meet the criteria for
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder because they are not preoccupied with obtaining
the substance and its use does not interfere with their performance of usual social or occupational
roles.
Comorbidity
Nonmedical use of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic agents is associated with alcohol use
disorder, tobacco use disorder, and, generally, illicit drug use. There may also be an overlap
between sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder and antisocial personality disorder;
depressive, bipolar, and anxiety disorders; and other substance use disorders, such as alcohol use
disorder and illicit drug use disorders. Antisocial behavior and antisocial personality disorder are
especially associated with sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder when the substances are
obtained illegally. Comorbidity with other substance use disorders and other psychiatric
disorders increases the risk of transition from sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use to use disorder
and decreases the probability of remission.
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recent use of a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic.
B. Clinically significant maladaptive behavioral or psychological changes (e.g.,
