inappropriate sexual or aggressive behavior, mood lability, impaired judgment)
that developed during, or shortly after, sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use.
627
C. One (or more) of the following signs or symptoms developing during, or shortly
after, sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use:
1. Slurred speech.
2. Incoordination.
3. Unsteady gait.
4. Nystagmus.
5. Impairment in cognition (e.g., attention, memory).
6. Stupor or coma.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with
another substance.
Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether there is a comorbid
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder. If a mild sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F13.120, and if a
moderate or severe sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder is comorbid, the
ICD-10-CM code is F13.220. If there is no comorbid sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F13.920.
Note: For information on Development and Course; Risk and Prognostic Factors;
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues; Diagnostic Markers; Functional Consequences of
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication; and Comorbidity, see the corresponding
sections in Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Use Disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication is the presence of clinically
significant maladaptive behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., inappropriate sexual or
aggressive behavior, mood lability, impaired judgment, impaired social or occupational
functioning) that develop during, or shortly after, use of a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
(Criteria A and B). As with other brain depressants, such as alcohol, these behaviors may be
accompanied by slurred speech, incoordination (at levels that can interfere with driving abilities
and with performing usual activities to the point of causing falls or automobile accidents), an
unsteady gait, nystagmus, impairment in cognition (e.g., attentional or memory problems), and
stupor or coma (Criterion C). Memory impairment is a prominent feature of sedative, hypnotic,
or anxiolytic intoxication and is most often characterized by an anterograde amnesia that
resembles “alcoholic blackouts,” which can be disturbing to the individual. The symptoms must
not be attributable to another medical condition and are not better explained by another mental
disorder (Criterion D). Intoxication may occur in individuals who are receiving these substances
by prescription, are borrowing the medication from friends or relatives, or are deliberately taking
