Alcohol use disorder.
Alcohol intoxication.
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disorders.
Neurocognitive disorders.
the substance to achieve intoxication. Because sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics are often
used in combination with other psychoactive substances, it can be difficult to ascertain whether
the functional consequences are attributable to a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic or to the use of
multiple substances.
Associated Features
Associated features include taking more medication than prescribed, taking multiple different
medications, or mixing sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic agents with alcohol, which can markedly
increase the effects of these agents.
Prevalence
The prevalence of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication in the general population is
unknown. However, it is probable that most nonmedical users of sedatives, hypnotics,
628
or anxiolytics would at some time have signs or symptoms that meet criteria for sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication; if so, then the prevalence of nonmedical sedative, hypnotic,
or anxiolytic use in the general population may be similar to the prevalence of sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication. For example, in 2018, tranquilizers or sedative were used
nonmedically in the United States by 2.4% of individuals age 12 or older and 4.9% of those ages
18–25.
Differential Diagnosis
Because the clinical presentations may be identical, distinguishing sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication from alcohol use disorder requires evidence for recent
ingestion of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic medications by self-report, informant report, or
toxicological testing. Many individuals who misuse sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics may also
misuse alcohol and other substances, and so multiple intoxication diagnoses are possible.
Alcohol intoxication may be distinguished from sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic intoxication by the smell of alcohol on the breath. Otherwise, the features of the two
disorders may be similar.
Sedative, 
hypnotic, 
or 
anxiolytic
intoxication is distinguished from sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disorders
(e.g., sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during withdrawal)
because the symptoms (e.g., anxiety) in the latter disorders are in excess of those usually
associated with sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication; predominate in the clinical
presentation; and are severe enough to warrant clinical attention.
In situations of cognitive impairment, traumatic brain injury, and
delirium from other causes, sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics may be intoxicating at quite low
dosages. The differential diagnosis in these complex settings is based on the predominant
syndrome. An additional diagnosis of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication may be
appropriate even if the substance has been ingested at a low dosage in the setting of these other
