disturbances: If a mild sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder is
comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F13.130, and if a moderate or severe
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is
F13.230. If there is no comorbid sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder
(e.g., in a patient taking sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics solely under
appropriate medical supervision), then the ICD-10-CM code is F13.930.
For sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal, with perceptual
disturbances: If a mild sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder is
comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F13.132, and if a moderate or severe
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is
F13.232. If there is no comorbid sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder
(e.g., in a patient taking sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics solely under
appropriate medical supervision), then the ICD-10-CM code is F13.932.
Note: For information on Development and Course; Risk and Prognostic Factors;
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues; Functional Consequences of Sedative, Hypnotic, or
Anxiolytic Withdrawal; and Comorbidity, see the corresponding sections in Sedative,
Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Use Disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal is the presence of a
characteristic syndrome that develops after a marked decrease in or cessation of intake after
several weeks or more of regular use (Criteria A and B). This withdrawal syndrome is
characterized by two or more symptoms (similar to alcohol withdrawal) that include autonomic
hyperactivity (e.g., increases in heart rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure, or body temperature,
along with sweating); a tremor of the hands; insomnia; nausea, sometimes accompanied by
vomiting; anxiety; and psychomotor agitation. A grand mal seizure may occur in perhaps as
many as 20%–30% of individuals undergoing untreated withdrawal from these substances. In
severe withdrawal, visual, tactile, or auditory hallucinations or illusions can occur but are usually
in the context of a withdrawal delirium. If the individual’s reality testing is intact (i.e., knows the
substance is causing the hallucinations) and the illusions occur in a clear sensorium, the specifier
“with perceptual disturbances”
630
can be noted. When hallucinations occur in the absence of intact reality testing, a diagnosis of
substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder should be considered. The symptoms cause
clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms must not be attributable to another medical condition
and are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., alcohol withdrawal, generalized
anxiety disorder) (Criterion D). Relief of withdrawal symptoms with administration of any
sedative-hypnotic agent would support a diagnosis of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
withdrawal.
