Other medical conditions.
Associated Features
The timing and severity of the withdrawal syndrome will differ depending on the specific
substance and its pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. For example, withdrawal from
shorter-acting substances that are rapidly absorbed and that have no active metabolites (e.g.,
triazolam) can begin within hours after the substance is stopped; withdrawal from substances
with long-acting metabolites (e.g., diazepam) may not begin for 1–2 days or longer. The
withdrawal syndrome produced by substances in this class may be characterized by the
development of a delirium that can be life-threatening. There may be evidence of tolerance and
withdrawal in the absence of a diagnosis of a benzodiazepine use disorder in an individual who
has abruptly discontinued benzodiazepines that were taken for long periods of time at prescribed
and therapeutic doses.
The time course of the withdrawal syndrome is generally predicted by the half-life of the
substance. Medications whose actions typically last about 10 hours or less (e.g., lorazepam,
oxazepam, temazepam) produce withdrawal symptoms within 6–8 hours of decreasing blood
levels that peak in intensity on the second day and improve markedly by the fourth or fifth day.
For substances with longer half-lives (e.g., diazepam), symptoms may not develop for more than
1 week, peak in intensity during the second week, and decrease markedly during the third or
fourth week. There may be additional longer-term symptoms at a much lower level of intensity
that persist for several months.
The longer the substance has been taken and the higher the dosages used, the more likely
there will be severe withdrawal. However, withdrawal has been reported with as little as 15 mg
of diazepam (or its equivalent in other benzodiazepines) when taken daily for several months.
Doses of approximately 40 mg of diazepam (or its equivalent) daily are more likely to produce
clinically relevant withdrawal symptoms, and even higher doses (e.g., 100 mg of diazepam) are
more likely to be followed by withdrawal seizures or delirium. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
withdrawal delirium is characterized by disturbances in consciousness and cognition, with visual,
tactile, or auditory hallucinations. When present, sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal
delirium should be diagnosed instead of withdrawal.
Prevalence
The prevalence of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal is unknown.
Diagnostic Markers
Seizures and autonomic instability in the setting of a history of prolonged exposure to sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic medications suggest a high likelihood of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
withdrawal.
Differential Diagnosis
The symptoms of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal may be
mimicked by other medical conditions (e.g., hypoglycemia, diabetic ketoacidosis). If seizures are
a feature of the sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal, the
631
