Essential tremor.
Alcohol withdrawal.
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disorders.
Anxiety disorders.
differential diagnosis includes the various causes of seizures (e.g., infections, head injury,
poisonings).
Essential tremor, a neurological condition that frequently runs in families, may
erroneously suggest the tremulousness associated with sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
withdrawal.
Alcohol withdrawal produces a syndrome very similar to that of sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal. The differential diagnosis is determined mostly through
clinical history, although liver damage and other potential signs of chronic alcohol toxicity (e.g.,
cardiomyopathy) can also be more suggestive of alcohol withdrawal than of sedative, hypnotic,
or anxiolytic withdrawal.
Sedative, 
hypnotic, 
or 
anxiolytic
withdrawal is distinguished from sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disorders
(e.g., sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during withdrawal)
because the symptoms (e.g., anxiety) in the latter disorders are in excess of those usually
associated with sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; predominate in the clinical
presentation; and are severe enough to warrant clinical attention.
Recurrence or worsening of an underlying anxiety disorder produces a
syndrome similar to sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal, although the most extreme
manifestations of withdrawal, such as delirium tremens or true seizures, are not symptoms of any
anxiety disorder. Withdrawal would be suspected with an abrupt reduction in the dosage of a
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic medication. When a taper is under way, distinguishing the
withdrawal syndrome from the underlying anxiety disorder can be difficult. As with alcohol,
lingering withdrawal symptoms (e.g., anxiety, moodiness, trouble sleeping) can be mistaken for
independent anxiety or depressive disorders (e.g., generalized anxiety disorder).
Comorbidity
Given the typical overlap of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal with sedative, hypnotic,
or anxiolytic use disorder, see “Comorbidity” under Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Use
Disorder for more details about co-occurring conditions that are likely to be encountered.
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Mental
Disorders
The following sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disorders are described in other
chapters of the manual with disorders with which they share phenomenology (see the
substance/medication-induced mental disorders in these chapters): sedative-, hypnotic-, or
anxiolytic-induced psychotic disorder (“Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic
Disorders”); sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced bipolar and related disorder (“Bipolar
and Related Disorders”); sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced depressive disorder
(“Depressive Disorders”); sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced anxiety disorder (“Anxiety
Disorders”); sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced sleep disorder (“Sleep-Wake
Disorders”); sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced sexual dysfunction (“Sexual
