two of the following, occurring within a 12-month period:
1. The stimulant is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than
was intended.
2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control
stimulant use.
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the stimulant,
use the stimulant, or recover from its effects.
4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the stimulant.
5. Recurrent stimulant use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at
work, school, or home.
6. Continued stimulant use despite having persistent or recurrent social or
interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of the stimulant.
7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
reduced because of stimulant use.
633
8. Recurrent stimulant use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.
9. Stimulant use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or
recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused
or exacerbated by the stimulant.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of the stimulant to achieve
intoxication or desired effect.
b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
the stimulant.
Note: This criterion is not considered to be met for those taking stimulant
medications solely under appropriate medical supervision, such as
medications for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or narcolepsy.
11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for the stimulant (refer to Criteria
A and B of the criteria set for stimulant withdrawal).
b. The stimulant (or a closely related substance) is taken to relieve or avoid
withdrawal symptoms.
Note: This criterion is not considered to be met for those taking stimulant
medications solely under appropriate medical supervision, such as
medications for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or narcolepsy.
Specify if:
In early remission: After full criteria for stimulant use disorder were previously
met, none of the criteria for stimulant use disorder have been met for at least 3
months but for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4,
