Diagnostic Features
Stimulants are a type of psychoactive substance that increases activity in the brain and can
temporarily elevate alertness, mood, and awareness. Stimulants covered in this chapter include
amphetamine and prescription stimulants with similar effects (e.g., methylphenidate) and
cocaine. Substance-related disorders involving certain other substances with stimulant properties
are classified in other sections of this chapter. These include caffeine (in caffeine-related
disorders), 
nicotine 
(in 
tobacco-related 
disorders), 
and 
MDMA 
(3,4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine; in other hallucinogen-related disorders), which has both
stimulant and hallucinogenic effects.
Given that the effects of amphetamine-type substances are similar to those of cocaine,
amphetamine-related disorders and cocaine-related disorders are grouped under the single rubric
“stimulant-related disorders.” Amphetamine-type substances (and other or unspecified
stimulants) and cocaine have different ICD-10-CM codes (e.g., F15.10 mild amphetamine-type
substance use disorder, F14.10 mild cocaine use disorder). The particular stimulant used by the
individual is recorded in the diagnosis (e.g., “methamphetamine withdrawal,” “methylphenidate
use disorder,” “cocaine intoxication”).
The amphetamine-type substances include stimulants with a substituted phenylethylamine
structure, such as amphetamine, dextroamphetamine, and methamphetamine. Also included are
substances that are structurally different but have similar effects, such as methylphenidate,
modafinil, and armodafinil. These amphetamine-type substances are usually taken orally or
intravenously, although methamphetamine is also taken by the nasal route. In addition to the
synthetic amphetamine-type compounds, there are naturally occurring, plant-derived stimulants
such as khât, as well as synthetic chemical khât analogs, called cathinones.
Amphetamines and other stimulants may be obtained by prescription for the treatment of
obesity, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and narcolepsy. Consequently, prescribed
stimulants may be diverted into the illegal market.
Cocaine, a naturally occurring substance produced by the coca plant, is consumed in several
preparations (e.g., coca leaves, coca paste, cocaine hydrochloride, and cocaine alkaloids such as
freebase and crack) that differ in potency because of varying levels of purity and speed of onset.
However, in all of the forms, cocaine is the active ingredient. Cocaine hydrochloride powder is
usually “snorted” through the nostrils or dissolved in water and injected intravenously. Crack and
other cocaine alkaloids are easily vaporized and inhaled, and thus their effects have an extremely
rapid onset.
Individuals exposed to amphetamine-type substances or cocaine can develop stimulant use
disorder as rapidly as 1 week, although the onset is not always this rapid. Regardless of the route
of administration, tolerance occurs with repeated use. Withdrawal symptoms, particularly
hypersomnia, increased appetite, and dysphoria, can occur and can enhance craving. Most
individuals with stimulant use disorder have experienced tolerance or withdrawal.
Use patterns and course are similar for disorders involving amphetamine-type substances and
cocaine, as both are potent central nervous system stimulants with similar psychoactive and
sympathomimetic effects. Amphetamine-type substances are longer acting than cocaine and thus
are used fewer times per day. Usage may be chronic or episodic, with binges punctuated by brief
non-use periods. Aggressive or violent behavior is common when high doses are smoked,
ingested, or administered intravenously. Intense temporary anxiety resembling panic disorder or
