Stimulant use disorder: amphetamine-type substances.
generalized anxiety disorder, as well as paranoid ideation and psychotic episodes that resemble
schizophrenia, is seen with high-dose use.
Withdrawal states are associated with temporary but intense depressive symptoms that can
resemble a major depressive episode; the depressive symptoms usually resolve
636
within 1 week. Tolerance to amphetamine-type substances develops and leads to escalation
of the dose. Conversely, some users of amphetamine-type substances develop sensitization,
characterized by enhanced effects.
Associated Features
When injected or smoked, stimulants typically produce an instant feeling of well-being,
confidence, and euphoria. Dramatic behavioral changes can rapidly develop with stimulant use
disorder. Chaotic behavior, social isolation, aggressive behavior, and sexual dysfunction can
result from long-term stimulant use disorder.
Individuals with acute intoxication may present with rambling speech, headache, transient
ideas of reference, and tinnitus. There may be paranoid ideation, auditory hallucinations in a
clear sensorium, and tactile hallucinations, which the individual usually recognizes as drug
effects. Threats or acting out of aggressive behavior may occur. Depression, suicidal thoughts,
irritability, anhedonia, emotional lability, or disturbances in attention and concentration
commonly occur during withdrawal. Mental disturbances associated with cocaine use usually
resolve hours to days after cessation of use but can persist for 1 month. Physiological changes
during stimulant withdrawal are opposite to those of the intoxication phase, sometimes including
bradycardia. Temporary depressive symptoms may meet symptomatic and duration criteria for
major depressive episode. Histories consistent with repeated panic attacks, social anxiety
disorder–like behavior, and generalized anxiety–like syndromes are common, as are eating
disorders. One extreme instance of stimulant toxicity is stimulant-induced psychotic disorder, a
disorder that resembles schizophrenia, with delusions and hallucinations.
Individuals with stimulant use disorder often develop conditioned responses to drug-related
stimuli (e.g., craving on seeing any white powderlike substance). These responses contribute to
relapse, are difficult to extinguish, and persist after detoxification.
Depressive symptoms with suicidal thoughts or behavior can occur and are generally the
most serious problems seen during stimulant withdrawal.
Prevalence
Estimated 
12-month 
prevalence 
of
amphetamine-type substance use disorder in the United States is 0.4% among individuals 12
years and older. Twelve-month prevalence is 0.1% among individuals ages 12–17 years, 0.5%
among those ages 18–25, and 0.4% among those age 26 and older. Rates are 0.5% for men and
0.2% for women, overall. Rates are approximately 0.4% among Hispanics and non-Hispanic
Whites and 0.1% among African Americans and Asian Americans. Prevalence estimates for
American Indian/Alaskan Natives and Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander populations are difficult
to determine, given small sample sizes, but there is some evidence for higher rates in American
