Stimulant use disorder: cocaine.
Temperamental.
Indians/Alaskan Natives.
Among U.S. adults, 6.6% (annual average) used prescription stimulants overall; 4.5% used
without misuse, 1.9% misused without use disorders, and 0.2% had use disorders. While non-
Hispanic Whites are more likely to use prescription stimulants nonmedically, Hispanics tend to
use them more frequently and have higher rates of prescription stimulant use disorder.
Estimated 12-month prevalence of cocaine use disorder in the
United States is 0.4% among individuals 12 years and older. Rates are 0.1% among individuals
ages 12–17 years, 0.7% among those ages 18–25 years, and 0.3% among those age 26 and older.
Rates are 0.5% for men and 0.2% for women, overall. Rates are 0.4% among African Americans
and non-Hispanic Whites, 0.3% in Hispanics, and < 0.1% among Asian Americans.
637
Development and Course
In the United States, stimulant use disorder occurs throughout all levels of society and is more
common among individuals ages 18–25 years compared with individuals ages 12–17 or 26 years
and older. On average, first regular use among individuals in treatment occurs at approximately
age 23 years. For primary methamphetamine treatment admissions, the average age is 34 years,
and for primary cocaine treatment admissions, the average age is 44 years for smoked cocaine
and 37 years for other routes.
Some persons begin stimulant use to control weight or to improve performance in school,
work, or athletics. Initial use may include obtaining medications such as methylphenidate or
amphetamine salts prescribed to others for the treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder. Among primary treatment admissions for amphetamine-type substance use in the
United States, 61% reported smoking, 26% reported injecting, and 9% reported snorting,
suggesting that stimulant use disorder can develop from multiple modes of administration.
Patterns of stimulant administration include episodic or daily (or almost daily) use. Episodic
use (e.g., intense use over a weekend or on one or more weekdays) tends to be separated by 2 or
more days of nonuse. “Binges” involve continuous high-dose use over hours or days and are
often associated with physical dependence. Binges usually terminate only when stimulant
supplies are depleted or exhaustion ensues. Chronic daily use may involve high or low doses,
often with an increase in dose over time.
Stimulant smoking and intravenous use are associated with rapid progression to severe-level
stimulant use disorder, often occurring over weeks to months. Intranasal use of cocaine and oral
use of amphetamine-type substances result in more gradual progression occurring over months to
years. With continued use, there is a diminution of pleasurable effects because of tolerance and
an increase in dysphoric effects.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Comorbid bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, antisocial personality disorder, and
other substance use disorders are risk factors for developing stimulant use disorder and for
relapse to cocaine use in treatment samples. Higher stress reactivity has been correlated with
frequency of cocaine use in some U.S. treatment samples. Conduct disorder in childhood and
antisocial personality disorder are associated with the development of stimulant-related
