Environmental.
disorders. In the United States, previous use of another substance, being male, having a Cluster B
personality disorder, family history of substance use disorder, and being separated, divorced, or
widowed all result in increased risk of using cocaine. Men who have sex with men are also at
higher risk for methamphetamine use.
Predictors of cocaine use among a cohort of U.S. teenagers include prenatal
cocaine exposure, postnatal cocaine use by parents, and exposure to community violence during
childhood. Research in industrialized countries suggests that exposure to intimate partner
violence or childhood mistreatment often co-occurs with stimulant use, especially in women. In a
cohort of U.S. women followed up longitudinally, socioeconomic status, including food
insecurity, had a dose-dependent effect on risk of stimulant use. For youth, especially girls, risk
factors include living in an unstable home environment, having a psychiatric condition, criminal
behavior, and associating with dealers and users.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The prevalence of cocaine use in the United States increased between 2001–2002 and 2012–
2013 among non-Latinx Whites, African Americans, and Latinx, but the prevalence of cocaine
use disorder increased only among Whites. Despite small variations, cocaine and other stimulant
use disorder diagnostic criteria perform equally across gender and
638
ethnoracial groups. In limited data on prevalence estimates, it appears that American
Indian/Alaskan Native populations are at higher risk for methamphetamine use disorder, and, to
a lesser degree, cocaine use disorder, than are non-Hispanic Whites, while native
Hawaiian/Pacific Islanders appear to have similar risks to non-Hispanic Whites.
Approximately 64% of individuals admitted to publicly funded substance abuse treatment
programs for primary methamphetamine/amphetamine-related disorders are non-Hispanic White,
followed by 20% of Hispanic origin, 3% Asian and Pacific Islander, and 6% non-Hispanic
Black. Among individuals admitted for primary treatment related to smoked cocaine, 51% were
non-Hispanic Black, 35% non-Hispanic White, 8% Hispanic, and 1% Asian/Pacific Islander. For
admissions related to other routes of cocaine administration, 47% were non-Hispanic White,
31% were non-Hispanic Black, 17% were of Hispanic origin, and 1% were Asian/Pacific
Islander. Rates of disorders in clinical samples should be interpreted with caution because they
may be affected by differential access to and utilization of services, pathways to care,
criminalization, stigma, and racial bias in diagnosis and referral for treatment.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
In the United States, women with cocaine use disorder more frequently have comorbid
psychiatric disorders, such as depression and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), compared
with men. Gonadal hormones affect a male’s responses to cocaine. Females with cocaine use
disorder and higher levels of progesterone have lower stress-induced and cue-induced cocaine
craving and lower cue-induced changes in blood pressure than females with cocaine use disorder
and lower levels of progesterone. This may explain why use of cocaine in pregnant females is
lower than in nonpregnant females.
