Diagnostic Markers
Benzoylecgonine, a metabolite of cocaine, typically remains in the urine for 1–3 days after a
single dose and may be present for 7–12 days in individuals using repeated high doses. Mildly
elevated liver function tests can be present in cocaine injectors or users with concomitant alcohol
use. There are no neurobiological markers of diagnostic utility. Discontinuation of chronic
cocaine use may be associated with electroencephalographic changes, suggesting persistent
abnormalities; alterations in secretion patterns of prolactin; and downregulation of dopamine
receptors.
Short-half-life amphetamine-type substances (e.g., methamphetamine) can be detected for 1–
3 days, and possibly up to 4 days depending on dosage and metabolism. Hair samples can be
used to detect presence of amphetamine-type substances for up to 90 days. Other laboratory
findings, as well as physical findings and other medical conditions (e.g., weight loss,
malnutrition; poor hygiene), are similar for both cocaine and amphetamine-type substance use
disorder.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Few data on the association of stimulant use disorders and suicide are available because most
studies examining suicidal thoughts and behavior examine use of stimulants rather than stimulant
use disorders. One systematic review found that regular or problem amphetamine use (examining
primarily individuals who inject amphetamines and/or individuals admitted to treatment for use
of amphetamines) is associated with increased suicide mortality. A general population study of
adults in the United States found an association of prescription stimulant use disorder with
suicidal thoughts. In a study of individuals admitted to substance use treatment, those with
cocaine use disorder were much more likely to report suicidal thoughts than those with other
substance use disorders. In a study of both men and women in the U.S. Veterans Administration
health care system,
639
cocaine and amphetamine use disorders were each associated with increased rates of suicide
deaths.
Functional Consequences of Stimulant Use Disorder
Various medical conditions may occur depending on the route of administration. Intranasal users
often develop sinusitis, irritation, bleeding of the nasal mucosa, and a perforated nasal septum.
Individuals who smoke stimulants are at increased risk for respiratory problems (e.g., coughing,
bronchitis, and pneumonitis). Injectors have puncture marks and “tracks,” most commonly on
their forearms. Risk of HIV and hepatitis C infection increases with frequent intravenous
injections and unsafe sexual activity. Other sexually transmitted diseases, hepatitis B, and
tuberculosis and other lung infections are also seen. Weight loss and malnutrition are common.
Chest pain may be a common symptom during stimulant intoxication. Myocardial infarction,
palpitations and arrhythmias, sudden death from respiratory or cardiac arrest, and stroke have
been associated with stimulant use among young and otherwise healthy individuals.
Pneumothorax can result from performing Valsalva-like maneuvers done to better absorb inhaled
