Phencyclidine intoxication.
Stimulant intoxication, stimulant withdrawal, and stimulant-induced mental disorders.
Independent mental disorders.
smoke. Cocaine use is associated with irregularities in placental blood flow, abruptio placentae,
premature labor and delivery, and an increased prevalence of infants with very low birth weights.
Individuals with stimulant use disorder may become involved in theft, prostitution, or drug
dealing in order to acquire drugs or money for drugs. Traumatic injuries due to violent behavior
are common among individuals trafficking drugs.
Neurocognitive impairment is common among both methamphetamine and cocaine users,
including deficits related to attention, impulsivity, verbal learning/memory, working memory,
and executive functioning. Transient psychosis and seizure have also been reported with chronic
use of either cocaine or methamphetamine, possibly related to patterns of use or the exacerbation
of preexisting vulnerabilities. Amphetamine use can cause toxic effects related to elevated body
temperature, and there is some evidence that chronic use causes neuroinflammation and
neurotoxicity in dopaminergic neurons. Oral health problems include “meth mouth” with gum
disease, tooth decay, and mouth sores related to the toxic effects of smoking the drug and to
bruxism while intoxicated. Adverse pulmonary effects appear to be less common for
amphetamine-type substances because they are smoked fewer times per day, although
methamphetamine use is still associated with a risk of pulmonary arterial hypertension.
Emergency department visits are common for stimulant-related mental disorder symptoms,
injury, skin infections, and dental pathology. In the United States, diagnosis of a stimulant use
disorder is associated with a 20% increase in 30-day readmission rates in assessment of follow-
up after hospitalization for “any cause” (a standard measure of overall hospital quality of care).
Differential Diagnosis
Intoxication with phencyclidine (PCP or “angel dust”) or synthetic
“designer drugs” such as mephedrone (known by different names, including “bath salts”) may
cause a similar clinical picture and can only be distinguished from stimulant intoxication by the
presence of cocaine or amphetamine-type substance metabolites in a urine or plasma sample.
Stimulant 
use
disorder is differentiated from stimulant intoxication, stimulant withdrawal, and stimulant-
induced mental disorders (e.g., stimulant-induced depressive disorder) in that stimulant use
disorder describes a problematic pattern of stimulant use that involves impaired control over
stimulant use, social impairment attributable to stimulant use, risky stimulant use (e.g., continued
stimulant use despite medical complications), and pharmacological symptoms (the development
of tolerance or withdrawal), whereas stimulant
640
intoxication, stimulant withdrawal, and stimulant-induced mental disorders describe psychiatric
syndromes that occur in the context of heavy use. Stimulant intoxication, stimulant withdrawal,
and stimulant-induced mental disorders occur frequently in individuals with stimulant use
disorder. In such cases, a diagnosis of stimulant intoxication, stimulant withdrawal, or a
stimulant-induced mental disorder should be given in addition to a diagnosis of stimulant use
disorder, the presence of which is indicated in the diagnostic code.
Some of the effects of stimulant use may resemble symptoms of
independent mental disorders, such as psychosis (schizophrenia) and low mood (major
