depressive disorder). Discerning whether these behaviors occurred before the intake of the drug
is important in the differentiation of acute drug effects from a preexisting mental disorder.
Comorbidity
Stimulant-related disorders often co-occur with other substance use disorders, especially those
involving substances with sedative properties, which are often taken to reduce insomnia,
nervousness, and other unpleasant side effects. Individuals admitted to treatment for cocaine use
are likely to also use heroin, PCP, or alcohol, and individuals admitted for amphetamine-type
substance use disorder are likely to use marijuana, heroin, or alcohol. Stimulant use disorder may
be associated with posttraumatic stress disorder, antisocial personality disorder, attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and gambling disorder. Cardiopulmonary problems are often
present in individuals seeking treatment for cocaine-related problems, with chest pain being the
most common. Medical problems occur in response to adulterants used as “cutting” agents.
Cocaine users who ingest cocaine cut with levamisole, an antimicrobial and veterinary
medication, may experience agranulocytosis and febrile neutropenia.
Stimulant Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recent use of an amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or other stimulant.
B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g.,
euphoria 
or 
affective 
blunting; 
changes 
in 
sociability; 
hypervigilance;
interpersonal sensitivity; anxiety, tension, or anger; stereotyped behaviors;
impaired judgment) that developed during, or shortly after, use of a stimulant.
C. Two (or more) of the following signs or symptoms, developing during, or shortly
after, stimulant use:
1. Tachycardia or bradycardia.
2. Pupillary dilation.
3. Elevated or lowered blood pressure.
4. Perspiration or chills.
5. Nausea or vomiting.
6. Evidence of weight loss.
7. Psychomotor agitation or retardation.
8. Muscular weakness, respiratory depression, chest pain, or cardiac
arrhythmias.
9. Confusion, seizures, dyskinesias, dystonias, or coma.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with
another substance.
