641
Specify the particular intoxicant (i.e., amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or
other stimulant).
Specify if:
With perceptual disturbances: This specifier may be noted when
hallucinations with intact reality testing or auditory, visual, or tactile illusions
occur in the absence of a delirium.
Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether the stimulant is an
amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or other stimulant; whether there is a
comorbid amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or other stimulant use disorder;
and whether or not there are perceptual disturbances.
For amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or other stimulant intoxication,
without perceptual disturbances: If a mild amphetamine-type substance or
other stimulant use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F15.120, and if
a moderate or severe amphetamine-type substance or other stimulant use
disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F15.220. If there is no comorbid
amphetamine-type substance or other stimulant use disorder, then the ICD-10-
CM code is F15.920. Similarly, if a mild cocaine use disorder is comorbid, the
ICD-10-CM code is F14.120, and if a moderate or severe cocaine use disorder is
comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F14.220. If there is no comorbid cocaine use
disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F14.920.
For amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or other stimulant intoxication,
with perceptual disturbances: If a mild amphetamine-type substance or other
stimulant use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F15.122, and if a
moderate or severe amphetamine-type substance or other stimulant use
disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F15.222. If there is no comorbid
amphetamine-type substance or other stimulant use disorder, then the ICD-10-
CM code is F15.922. Similarly, if a mild cocaine use disorder is comorbid, the
ICD-10-CM code is F14.122, and if a moderate or severe cocaine use disorder is
comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F14.222. If there is no comorbid cocaine use
disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F14.922.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of stimulant intoxication, related to amphetamine-type substances and
cocaine, is the presence of clinically significant behavioral or psychological changes that develop
during, or shortly after, use of stimulants (Criteria A and B). Auditory hallucinations may be
prominent, as may paranoid ideation, and these symptoms must be distinguished from an
independent psychotic disorder such as schizophrenia. Stimulant intoxication usually begins with
a “high” feeling and includes one or more of the following: euphoria with enhanced vigor,
gregariousness, 
hyperactivity, 
restlessness, 
hypervigilance, 
interpersonal 
sensitivity,
talkativeness, anxiety, tension, alertness, grandiosity, stereotyped and repetitive behavior, anger,
impaired judgment, and, in the case of chronic intoxication, affective blunting with fatigue or
