sadness and social withdrawal. These behavioral and psychological changes are accompanied by
two or more of the following signs and symptoms that develop during or shortly after stimulant
use: tachycardia or bradycardia; pupillary dilation; elevated or lowered blood pressure;
perspiration or chills; nausea or vomiting; evidence of weight loss; psychomotor agitation or
retardation; muscular weakness, respiratory depression, chest pain, or cardiac arrhythmias; and
confusion, seizures, dyskinesias, dystonias, or coma (Criterion C). Intoxication, either acute or
chronic, is often associated with impaired social or occupational functioning. Severe intoxication
can lead to convulsions, cardiac arrhythmias, hyperpyrexia, and death. For the diagnosis of
stimulant intoxication to be made, the symptoms must not be attributable to another medical
condition and are not better explained by another mental disorder
642
(Criterion D). While stimulant intoxication occurs in individuals with stimulant use disorders,
intoxication is not a criterion for stimulant use disorder, which is confirmed by the presence of 2
of the 11 diagnostic criteria for use disorder.
Associated Features
The magnitude and direction of the behavioral and physiological changes depend on many
variables, including the dose used and the characteristics of the individual using the substance or
the context (e.g., tolerance, rate of absorption, chronicity of use, context in which taken).
Stimulant effects such as euphoria, increased pulse and blood pressure, and psychomotor activity
are most commonly seen. Depressant effects such as sadness, bradycardia, decreased blood
pressure, and decreased psychomotor activity are less common and generally emerge only with
chronic high-dose use.
Prevalence
Although prevalence of stimulant intoxication is not known, prevalence of stimulant use can be
used as a proxy. Many individuals who use stimulants may not have symptoms that fully meet
the criteria for stimulant intoxication, which requires “clinically significant problematic
behavioral or psychological changes.” Thus, rates of stimulant use can be considered the upper
bounds of the likely prevalence of stimulant intoxication.
Estimated 12-month prevalence of cocaine use in the United States is 2.2% for individuals
age 12 and older (0.5% among individuals ages 12–17-years, 6.2% among individuals ages 18–
25 years, and 1.7% among individuals age 26 and older); 3% of men/boys and 1.4% of
women/girls used cocaine in the last 12 months. Twelve-month prevalence of cocaine use is
2.3% among Whites, 2.2% among Hispanics, 1.7% among African Americans, and 1% among
Asian Americans.
Estimated 12-month prevalence of methamphetamine use in the United States is 0.6% for
individuals age 12 and older (0.2% among individuals ages 12–17 years, 1.1% among
individuals ages 18–25 years, and 0.6% among individuals age 26 and older). Twelve-month
prevalence of methamphetamine use is 0.8% among men/boys and 0.4% among women/girls.
Twelve-month prevalence of methamphetamine use is 0.7% among Whites, 0.6% among
Hispanics, 0.2% among African Americans, and 0.1% among Asian Americans. Small sample
