Stimulant-induced mental disorders.
amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or other stimulant and on whether or not
there is a comorbid amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or other stimulant use
disorder. If mild amphetamine-type substance or other stimulant use disorder is
comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F15.13. If moderate or severe amphetamine-type
substance or other stimulant use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is
F15.23. For amphetamine-type substance or other stimulant withdrawal occurring in
the absence of amphetamine-type substance or other stimulant use disorder (e.g., in
a patient taking amphetamine solely under appropriate medical supervision), the
ICD-10-CM code is F15.93. If mild cocaine use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM
code is F14.13. If moderate or severe cocaine use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-
CM code is F14.23. For cocaine withdrawal occurring in the absence of a cocaine
use disorder, the ICD-10-CM code is F14.93.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of stimulant withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal
syndrome that develops within a few hours to several days after the cessation of (or marked
reduction in) stimulant use (generally high dose) that has been prolonged (Criterion A). The
withdrawal syndrome is characterized by the development of dysphoric mood accompanied by
two or more of the following physiological changes: fatigue, vivid and unpleasant dreams,
insomnia or hypersomnia, increased appetite, and psychomotor retardation or agitation (Criterion
B). Bradycardia is often present and is a reliable measure of stimulant withdrawal.
Anhedonia and drug craving can often be present but are not part of the diagnostic criteria.
These symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms must not be attributable to
another medical condition and are not better explained by another mental disorder (Criterion D).
644
Associated Features
Acute withdrawal symptoms (“a crash”) are often seen after periods of repetitive high-dose use
(“runs” or “binges”). These symptoms are characterized by intense and unpleasant feelings of
lassitude and depression and increased appetite, generally requiring several days of rest and
recuperation. Depressive symptoms with suicidal thoughts or behavior can occur and are
generally the most serious problems seen during “crashing” or other forms of stimulant
withdrawal. Many individuals with stimulant use disorder may experience a withdrawal
syndrome at some point.
Differential Diagnosis
Stimulant withdrawal is distinguished from stimulant-induced
mental disorders (e.g., stimulant-induced depressive disorder, with onset during withdrawal)
because the symptoms (e.g., depressed mood) in these latter disorders are in excess of those
usually associated with stimulant withdrawal, predominate in the clinical presentation, and are
severe enough to warrant clinical attention.
