646
In early remission: After full criteria for tobacco use disorder were previously
met, none of the criteria for tobacco use disorder have been met for at least 3
months but for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4,
“Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use tobacco,” may be met).
In sustained remission: After full criteria for tobacco use disorder were
previously met, none of the criteria for tobacco use disorder have been met at
any time during a period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion
A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use tobacco,” may be met).
Specify if:
On maintenance therapy: The individual is taking a long-term maintenance
medication, such as nicotine replacement medication, and no criteria for tobacco
use disorder have been met for that class of medication (except tolerance to, or
withdrawal from, the nicotine replacement medication).
In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
in an environment where access to tobacco is restricted.
Code based on current severity/remission: If a tobacco withdrawal or tobacco-
induced sleep disorder is also present, do not use the codes below for tobacco use
disorder. Instead, the comorbid tobacco use disorder is indicated in the 4th character
of the tobacco-induced disorder code (see the coding note for tobacco withdrawal or
tobacco-induced sleep disorder). For example, if there is comorbid tobacco-induced
sleep disorder and tobacco use disorder, only the tobacco-induced sleep disorder
code is given, with the 4th character indicating whether the comorbid tobacco use
disorder is moderate or severe: F17.208 for moderate or severe tobacco use
disorder with tobacco-induced sleep disorder. It is not permissible to code a
comorbid mild tobacco use disorder with a tobacco-induced sleep disorder.
Specify current severity/remission:
Z72.0 Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
F17.200 Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
F17.201 Moderate, In early remission
F17.201 Moderate, In sustained remission
F17.200 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
F17.201 Severe, In early remission
F17.201 Severe, In sustained remission
Specifiers
“On maintenance therapy” applies as a specifier to be added to “in remission” if the individual is
both in remission and on maintenance therapy. “In a controlled environment” applies as a further
specifier of remission if the individual is both in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e.,
in early remission in a controlled environment or in sustained remission in a controlled
