environment). Examples of these environments are closely supervised and substance-free jails,
therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.
Diagnostic Features
Tobacco use disorder can develop with use of all forms of tobacco (e.g., cigarettes, chewing
tobacco, snuff, pipes, cigars, electronic nicotine delivery devices such as electronic cigarettes [e-
cigarettes]) and with prescription nicotine-containing medications (nicotine gum and patch). The
relative ability of these products to produce tobacco use disorder or to induce withdrawal is
associated with the rapidity of the route of administration (smoked over oral over transdermal)
and the nicotine content of the product. The name of this substance category was changed from
“nicotine” in prior editions of DSM to “tobacco” in DSM-5 on the basis of harms from addiction
being associated mostly with tobacco and much less with nicotine.
Tobacco use disorder is common among individuals who use cigarettes and smokeless
tobacco daily, is less common among individuals who use e-cigarettes, and is uncommon
647
among those who do not use tobacco daily or use nicotine medications. Tolerance to tobacco
is exemplified by the disappearance of nausea and dizziness after intake and by a more intense
effect of tobacco the first time it is used during the day. Cessation of tobacco use can produce a
well-defined withdrawal syndrome. Many individuals with tobacco use disorder use tobacco to
relieve or to avoid withdrawal symptoms (e.g., after being in a situation where use is restricted).
Many individuals with tobacco use disorder have tobacco-related physical symptoms or diseases
and continue to smoke. The large majority report craving when they do not smoke for several
hours. Spending excessive time using tobacco can be exemplified by chain-smoking (i.e.,
smoking one cigarette after another with no time between cigarettes). Because tobacco sources
are readily and legally available, and because tobacco intoxication is very rare, spending a great
deal of time attempting to procure tobacco or recovering from its effects is uncommon. Giving
up important social, occupational, or recreational activities can occur when an individual forgoes
an activity because it occurs in tobacco use–restricted areas. Use of tobacco rarely results in
failure to fulfill major role obligations (e.g., interference with work or home responsibilities), but
persistent social or interpersonal problems (e.g., having arguments with others about tobacco use,
avoiding social situations because of others’ disapproval of tobacco use) or use that is physically
hazardous (e.g., smoking in bed, smoking around flammable chemicals) occur at an intermediate
prevalence. Although these criteria are less often endorsed by tobacco users, if endorsed, they
can indicate a more severe disorder.
Associated Features
Smoking within 30 minutes of waking, smoking daily, smoking more cigarettes per day, and
waking at night to smoke are associated with tobacco use disorder. Environmental cues can
evoke craving and withdrawal. Serious medical conditions often occur, including lung and other
cancers, cardiac and pulmonary disease, perinatal problems, cough, shortness of breath, and
accelerated skin aging.
