Temperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Prevalence
Although cigarettes are the most commonly used tobacco product, use of other tobacco products
(especially e-cigarettes) has become more common. In the United States, 19% of adults used a
tobacco product in the last year, 19% used more than one product, 14% used cigarettes, 4% used
cigars, 3% used e-cigarettes, and 2% used smokeless tobacco. One fourth (24%) of current U.S.
smokers are nondaily smokers.
The 12-month prevalence of DSM-5 tobacco use disorder in the United States in 2012–2013
was 20% among adults age 18 years and older and 29.6% among Native Americans, 22.3%
among non-Latinx Whites, 20.1% among African Americans, 12.2% among Latinx, and 11.2%
among Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders. Prevalence was higher among men; those who
were young, unmarried, less educated, poor, or residing in the southern United States; and those
with almost any psychiatric disorder. The prevalence among current daily smokers is
approximately 50%.
Global comparisons show that in all geographic regions of the world, the age-standardized
prevalence of daily tobacco smoking is higher in men than in women, but the gender ratio varies
greatly, from 16.9:1 in East Asia to 1.2:1 in Australasia.
Development and Course
About 20% of U.S. high school seniors report having ever smoked cigarettes, and about 5% have
used in the past 30 days. Among adolescents who smoke cigarettes at least monthly, most of
these individuals will become daily tobacco users in the future. Initiation of smoking after age 21
years is rare. Some of the tobacco use disorder criteria symptoms (e.g., craving) occur soon after
beginning tobacco use, suggesting the addiction process begins with initial use; however,
fulfilling DSM criteria usually occurs over several years.
648
Nondaily smoking has become more prevalent since the late 1990s in the United States,
especially among individuals ages 18–34 years, Blacks, Hispanics, and individuals with at least a
college education.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Individuals with externalizing personality traits are more likely to initiate
tobacco use. Children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or conduct disorder, and
adults with depressive, bipolar, anxiety, personality, psychotic, or other substance use disorders,
are at higher risk for starting and continuing tobacco use and of tobacco use disorder.
Persons with low incomes and low educational levels are more likely to initiate
tobacco use and are less likely to stop.
Genetic factors contribute to the onset of tobacco use, the continuation
of tobacco use, and the development of tobacco use disorder, with a degree of heritability
equivalent to that observed with other substance use disorders (i.e., about 50%). Some of this
risk is specific to tobacco, and some is common with the vulnerability to developing any
substance use disorder.
