Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Acceptance of tobacco use varies across cultural contexts. Age-standardized prevalence of daily
tobacco smoking varies greatly by geographic region, ranging from 4.7% in Western Sub-
Saharan Africa to 24.2% in Eastern Europe. The degree to which these geographic differences
are the result of income, education, and tobacco control activities in a country is unclear.
Prevalence of tobacco use in the United States varies by age, gender, and ethnoracial
background, with lower rates of smoking onset and progression to daily smoking among Black
youth, especially young women. Liver enzyme polymorphisms that vary across ethnoracial
groups can affect nicotine metabolism, contributing to variation in smoking behavior. Higher
tobacco use disorder prevalence is also associated with exposure to racism and ethnic
discrimination. Prevalence of DSM-IV nicotine dependence is higher among adult lesbian, gay,
and bisexual individuals than among heterosexuals, possibly also due to an association with
exposure to sexual orientation–related discrimination. Among individuals with DSM-IV nicotine
dependence, lower income and education are associated with disorder persistence.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
The ratio of men to women among U.S. smokers is approximately 1.4:1 and has been stable
between 2004 and 2014. This ratio is generally consistent across various income and educational
levels. The ratio diminishes in older age groups as fewer men are smoking as age increases. The
literature from several U.S. settings suggests that negative reinforcement (i.e., that smoking
relieves negative affect) is a greater motivator in women than in men. Menstrual cycle effects on
smoking are found inconsistently, but tobacco withdrawal appears worse in the luteal than the
follicular phase of the cycle. Pregnant females smoke at a lower rate than nonpregnant females
but relapse back to smoking rapidly after delivery.
Diagnostic Markers
The following biomarkers can be used to measure the extent of tobacco or nicotine use: carbon
monoxide in the breath and nicotine and its metabolite cotinine in blood, saliva, or urine;
however, these are only weakly associated with tobacco use disorder.
649
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
National U.S. survey data show that past-year cigarette use is associated with a two- to threefold
increased risk of suicidal thoughts and behavior, with earlier age at first tobacco use increasing
risk. Evidence from the U.S. Veterans Health Administration shows that even after adjustment
for covariates, tobacco use disorder is associated with an increased risk of suicide. A large study
of twins in Finland found that the relationship between tobacco use and suicide increased in a
dose-response manner, and that for identical twins discordant for tobacco use, tobacco use was
associated with a sixfold increased risk for suicide.
Functional Consequences of Tobacco Use Disorder
Medical consequences of tobacco use often begin when tobacco users are in their 40s and usually
