F17.203
become progressively more debilitating over time. One-half of smokers who do not stop using
tobacco will die early from a tobacco-related illness, and smoking-related morbidity occurs in
more than one-half of tobacco users. Most medical conditions result from exposure to carbon
monoxide, tars, and other non-nicotine components of tobacco. The major predictor of
reversibility is duration of smoking. Secondhand smoke increases the risk of heart disease and
cancer by 30%. Long-term use of nicotine medications does not appear to cause medical harm.
Comorbidity
The most common medical conditions from smoking are cardiovascular illnesses, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, and cancers. Smoking also increases perinatal problems, such as
low birth weight and miscarriage. Prevalence of smoking is almost twice as high in individuals
with major depressive disorder; although the prevalence of smoking in the United States is
higher among individuals with low socioeconomic status, the increased prevalence of smoking
among those with depression is independent of socioeconomic status. The most common
psychiatric comorbidities associated with smoking are alcohol and other substance, depressive,
bipolar, anxiety, personality, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorders. In the United States,
individuals with a psychiatric disorder are three times more likely than others to have tobacco
use disorder. Adults with DSM-5 tobacco use disorder are significantly more likely than other
adults to have comorbid psychiatric disorders, including other DSM-5 substance use disorders,
major depressive disorder, bipolar I disorder, panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder,
posttraumatic stress disorder, and borderline and antisocial personality disorders.
Tobacco Withdrawal
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Daily use of tobacco for at least several weeks.
B. Abrupt cessation of tobacco use, or reduction in the amount of tobacco used,
followed within 24 hours by four (or more) of the following signs or symptoms:
1. Irritability, frustration, or anger.
2. Anxiety.
3. Difficulty concentrating.
4. Increased appetite.
5. Restlessness.
6. Depressed mood.
7. Insomnia.
650
C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
