D. The signs or symptoms are not attributed to another medical condition and are
not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication or
withdrawal from another substance.
Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code for tobacco withdrawal is F17.203. Note that the
ICD-10-CM code indicates the comorbid presence of a moderate or severe tobacco
use disorder, reflecting the fact that tobacco withdrawal can only occur in the
presence of a moderate or severe tobacco use disorder.
Diagnostic Features
Withdrawal symptoms impair the ability to stop tobacco use. The symptoms after abstinence
from tobacco are in large part due to nicotine deprivation. Tobacco withdrawal is common
among daily tobacco users who stop or reduce their use of tobacco. Symptoms are more intense
among individuals who smoke cigarettes and also use smokeless tobacco or electronic cigarettes
daily. This symptom intensity is likely attributable to the more rapid onset and higher levels of
nicotine with cigarette smoking. Significant withdrawal among those who are nondaily cigarette
users or use only nicotine medications is uncommon.
Typically, heart rate decreases by 5–12 bpm in the first few days after stopping smoking, and
weight increases an average of 4–7 lb (2–3 kg) over the first year after stopping smoking.
Tobacco withdrawal can produce clinically significant mood changes and functional impairment.
Because of conditioning effects, withdrawal can be prompted by environmental cues such as
seeing others smoking. Gradual reduction of tobacco decreases the severity of withdrawal.
Associated Features
Craving for tobacco or nicotine is very common during abstinence and has a large effect on the
ability to remain abstinent. Abstinence can increase impulsivity and anhedonia and can decrease
positive affect. Abstinence from tobacco or nicotine also appears to increase craving for sweet or
sugary foods and impairs performance on tasks requiring vigilance. Smoking increases the
metabolism of many medications used to treat mental disorders; thus, cessation of smoking can
increase the blood levels of these medications, and this can produce clinically significant
outcomes. This effect appears to be due not to nicotine but rather to other compounds in tobacco.
Prevalence
Approximately 50% of daily smokers who quit for 2 or more days will have four or more
symptoms of tobacco withdrawal. The most commonly endorsed signs and symptoms are
anxiety, irritability, and difficulty concentrating. The least commonly endorsed symptoms are
depression and insomnia.
Development and Course
Tobacco withdrawal usually begins within 24 hours of stopping or cutting down tobacco use,
peaks at 2–3 days after abstinence, and usually lasts 2–3 weeks. Tobacco withdrawal symptoms
can occur among adolescent tobacco users, even prior to daily tobacco use. Prolonged symptoms
beyond 1 month can occur but are uncommon.
