Temperamental.
Genetic and physiological.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Smokers with depressive disorders, bipolar disorders, anxiety disorders,
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and other substance use disorders have more severe
withdrawal.
651
Genotype can influence the probability of withdrawal upon abstinence.
Diagnostic Markers
The following biomarkers can be used to measure the extent of tobacco or nicotine use but are
only weakly associated with tobacco withdrawal: carbon monoxide in the breath and nicotine
and its metabolite cotinine in blood, saliva, or urine.
Functional Consequences of Tobacco Withdrawal
Tobacco withdrawal can cause significant distress and difficulty functioning in a minority of
smokers, but this may be uncommon. Withdrawal impairs the ability to stop or control tobacco
use. Whether tobacco withdrawal can prompt the development of a new mental disorder or
recurrence of a mental disorder is debatable, but if this occurs, it would be in a small minority of
tobacco users.
Differential Diagnosis
The symptoms of tobacco withdrawal overlap with those of other substance withdrawal
syndromes (e.g., alcohol withdrawal; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; stimulant
withdrawal; caffeine withdrawal; opioid withdrawal); caffeine intoxication; anxiety, depressive,
bipolar, and sleep disorders; and medication-induced akathisia. Admission to smoke-free
inpatient units or voluntary smoking cessation can induce withdrawal symptoms that mimic,
intensify, or disguise other disorders or adverse effects of medications used to treat mental
disorders (e.g., irritability thought to be due to alcohol withdrawal could be due to tobacco
withdrawal). Reduction in symptoms with the use of nicotine confirms the diagnosis.
Comorbidity
Given the typical overlap of tobacco withdrawal with tobacco use disorder, see “Comorbidity”
under Tobacco Use Disorder for more details about co-occurring conditions that are likely to be
encountered.
Tobacco-Induced Mental Disorders
Tobacco-induced sleep disorder is discussed in the chapter “Sleep-Wake Disorders” (see
“Substance/Medication-Induced Sleep Disorder”).
Unspecified Tobacco-Related Disorder
