6. Continued use of the substance despite having persistent or recurrent social
or interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of its use.
7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
reduced because of use of the substance.
8. Recurrent use of the substance in situations in which it is physically
hazardous.
9. Use of the substance is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent
or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been
caused or exacerbated by the substance.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of the substance to achieve
intoxication or desired effect.
b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
the substance.
11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for other (or unknown) substance
(refer to Criteria A and B of the criteria sets for other [or unknown]
substance withdrawal).
653
b. The substance (or a closely related substance) is taken to relieve or avoid
withdrawal symptoms.
Specify if:
In early remission: After full criteria for other (or unknown) substance use
disorder were previously met, none of the criteria for other (or unknown)
substance use disorder have been met for at least 3 months but for less than 12
months (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge
to use the substance,” may be met).
In sustained remission: After full criteria for other (or unknown) substance use
disorder were previously met, none of the criteria for other (or unknown)
substance use disorder have been met at any time during a period of 12 months
or longer (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or
urge to use the substance,” may be met).
Specify if:
In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
in an environment where access to the substance is restricted.
Code based on current severity/remission: If an other (or unknown) substance
intoxication, other (or unknown) substance withdrawal, or other (or unknown)
substance–induced mental disorder is present, do not use the codes below for other
(or unknown) substance use disorder. Instead, the comorbid other (or unknown)
substance use disorder is indicated in the 4th character of the other (or unknown)
