gaseous substances (including nitrous oxide mentioned above) are included in the other (or
unknown) substance category. Unknown substance–related disorders are associated with
unidentified substances, such as intoxications in which the individual cannot identify the
ingested drug, or substance use disorders involving either new, black market drugs not yet
identified or familiar drugs illegally sold under false names.
Note that substances included within the scope of one of the substance classes should be
coded within that respective substance class and are inappropriate to include in the “other
substance” category. For example, the following substances are explicitly included in specific
substance classes and should not be included in the “other substance” category: synthetic
cannabinoids are included in the cannabis category; propofol is included in the sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic category; and cathinones (including khât plant agents and synthetic
chemical derivatives) are included in the stimulant category.
Other (or unknown) substance use disorder is a mental disorder in which repeated use of an
other or unknown substance typically continues, despite the individual’s knowing that the
substance is causing serious problems for the individual. Those problems are reflected in the
diagnostic criteria. When the substance is known but does not fit within any of the other nine
substance classes, it should be reflected when recording and coding the name of the disorder
(e.g., “nitrous oxide use disorder,” using the applicable code for other [or unknown] substance
use disorder).
Associated Features
A diagnosis of other (or unknown) substance use disorder is supported by any of the following:
the individual’s reported use of a substance that is not among the nine classes listed in this
chapter; recurring episodes of intoxication with negative results in standard drug screens, which
may not detect new or rarely used substances; and the presence of symptoms characteristic of an
unidentified substance that has newly appeared in the individual’s community.
Because of access to nitrous oxide (“laughing gas”), membership in certain populations may
be associated with frequent use of the substance and possibly with a diagnosis of nitrous oxide
use disorder. The role of this gas as an anesthetic agent leads to misuse by some medical and
dental professionals, and its use as a propellant for commercial products (e.g., whipped cream
dispensers) contributes to misuse by food service workers. Nitrous oxide misuse by adolescents
and young adults is significant, and some individuals with very frequent use may present with
serious medical complications and mental conditions, including myeloneuropathy, spinal cord
subacute combined degeneration, peripheral neuropathy, and psychosis.
Use of amyl-, butyl-, and isobutyl (and similar) nitrite gases is prevalent among homosexual
men and some adolescents, especially those with conduct disorder.
Substance use disorders generally are associated with elevated risks of suicide, but there is no
evidence of unique risk factors for suicide with other (or unknown) substance use disorder.
655
Prevalence
Based on extremely limited data, the prevalence of most other (or unknown) substance use
disorders is likely lower than that of use disorders involving the nine substance classes in this
