Use of other or unknown substances without meeting criteria for other (or unknown) substance
use disorder.
Substance use disorders.
Other (or unknown) substance intoxication, other (or unknown) substance withdrawal, and
other (or unknown) substance–induced mental disorders.
chapter. For certain gaseous substances, prevalence of use is not rare (lifetime prevalence in the
U.S. household population for individuals age 12 and older is estimated at 4.6% for nitrous oxide
and 2.5% for nitrites), but how often the patterns of use qualify for a use disorder is unknown.
Development and Course
No single pattern of development or course characterizes the pharmacologically varied other (or
unknown) substance use disorders. Often unknown substance use disorders will be reclassified
when the unknown substance eventually is identified.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Risk and prognostic factors for other (or unknown) substance use disorders are thought to be
similar to those for most substance use disorders and include the presence of any other substance
use disorders, conduct disorder, or antisocial personality disorder in the individual or the
individual’s family; early onset of substance problems; easy availability of the substance in the
individual’s environment; childhood maltreatment or trauma; and evidence of limited early self-
control and behavioral disinhibition.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Certain cultures may be associated with other (or unknown) substance use disorders involving
specific indigenous substances within the cultural region, such as betel nut.
Diagnostic Markers
Urine, breath, or saliva tests may correctly identify a commonly used substance falsely sold as a
novel product. However, routine clinical tests usually cannot identify truly unusual or new
substances, which may require testing in specialized laboratories.
Differential Diagnosis
Use of unknown substances is not rare among adolescents, but most use does not meet the
diagnostic standard of two or more criteria for other (or unknown) substance use disorder in a
12-month period.
Other (or unknown) substance use disorder may co-occur with various
substance use disorders that involve any of the nine substance classes presented earlier in this
chapter, and the symptoms of the disorders may be similar and overlapping. To disentangle
symptom patterns, it is helpful to inquire about which symptoms persisted during periods when
some of the substances were not being used.
Other (or unknown) substance use disorder is differentiated from other (or unknown) substance
intoxication, other (or unknown) substance withdrawal, and other-(or unknown) substance-
induced mental disorders (e.g., corticosteroid-induced bipolar and related disorder) in that other
(or unknown) substance use disorder describes a problematic pattern of use of the other (or
unknown) substance that involves impaired control over the use of the substance, social
