impairment attributable to use of the substance, risky use of the substance (e.g., continued use
despite medical complications), and pharmacological symptoms (the development of
656
tolerance or withdrawal), whereas other (or unknown) substance intoxication, other (or
unknown) substance withdrawal, and other (or unknown) substance-induced mental disorders
describe psychiatric syndromes that occur in the context of heavy use. Other (or unknown)
substance intoxication, other (or unknown) substance withdrawal, and other (or unknown)
substance–induced mental disorders may occur in individuals with other (or unknown) substance
use disorder. In such cases, a diagnosis of other (or unknown) substance intoxication, other (or
unknown) substance withdrawal, or other (or unknown) substance–induced mental disorder
should be given in addition to a diagnosis of other (or unknown) substance use disorder, the
presence of which is indicated in the diagnostic code.
Comorbidity
Substance use disorders, including other (or unknown) substance use disorder, are commonly
comorbid with one another, with conduct disorder in adolescence, and with antisocial personality
disorder.
Other (or Unknown) Substance Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. The development of a reversible substance-specific syndrome attributable to
recent ingestion of (or exposure to) a substance that is not listed elsewhere or is
unknown.
B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes that are
attributable to the effect of the substance on the central nervous system (e.g.,
impaired motor coordination, psychomotor agitation or retardation, euphoria,
anxiety, belligerence, mood lability, cognitive impairment, impaired judgment,
social withdrawal) and develop during, or shortly after, use of the substance.
C. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are
not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with
another substance.
Specify if:
With perceptual disturbances: This specifier may be noted when
hallucinations with intact reality testing or auditory, visual, or tactile illusions
occur in the absence of a delirium.
Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether there is a comorbid other
(or unknown) substance use disorder involving the same substance and whether or
not there are perceptual disturbances.
