For other (or unknown) substance intoxication, without perceptual
disturbances: If a mild other (or unknown) substance use disorder is comorbid,
the ICD-10-CM code is F19.120, and if a moderate or severe other (or unknown)
substance use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F19.220. If there is
no comorbid other (or unknown) substance use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM
code is F19.920.
For 
other 
(or 
unknown) 
substance 
intoxication, 
with 
perceptual
disturbances: If a mild other (or unknown) substance use disorder is comorbid,
the ICD-10-CM code is F19.122, and if a moderate or severe other (or unknown)
substance use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F19.222. If there is
no comorbid other (or unknown) substance use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM
code is F19.922.
Note: For information on Risk and Prognostic Factors, Culture-Related Diagnostic
Issues, and Diagnostic Markers, see the corresponding sections in Other (or Unknown)
Substance Use Disorder.
657
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of other (or unknown) substance intoxication is the presence of clinically
significant behavioral or psychological changes that develop during, or immediately after, use of
either a) a substance not included within one of the nine substance classes presented in this
chapter (i.e., alcohol; caffeine; cannabis; phencyclidine and other hallucinogens; inhalants;
opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics; stimulants; or tobacco) or b) an unknown substance.
If the substance is known, it should be reflected in the name of the disorder upon coding (e.g.,
“kava intoxication”).
Application of the diagnostic criteria for other (or unknown) substance intoxication is very
challenging. Criterion A requires development of a reversible “substance-specific syndrome,”
but if the substance is unknown, that syndrome usually will be unknown. To resolve this conflict,
clinicians may ask the individual or obtain collateral history as to whether the individual has
experienced a similar episode after using substances with the same “street” name or from the
same source. Similarly, hospital emergency departments sometimes recognize over a few days
numerous presentations of a severe, unfamiliar intoxication syndrome from a newly available,
previously unknown substance. Because of the great variety of intoxicating substances, Criterion
B can provide only broad examples of signs and symptoms from some intoxications, with no
threshold for the number of symptoms required for a diagnosis; clinical judgment guides those
decisions. Criterion C requires ruling out other medical conditions, mental disorders, or
intoxications.
Prevalence
The prevalence of other (or unknown) substance intoxication is unknown.
Development and Course
