Use of other or unknown substance, without meeting criteria for other (or unknown) substance
intoxication.
Substance intoxication or other substance/medication-induced mental disorders.
Other toxic, metabolic, traumatic, neoplastic, vascular, or infectious disorders that impair brain
function and cognition.
Intoxications usually appear and then peak minutes to hours after use of the substance, but the
onset and course vary with the substance and the route of administration. Generally, substances
used by pulmonary inhalation and intravenous injection have the most rapid onset of action,
whereas those ingested by mouth and requiring metabolism to an active product are much
slower. (For example, after ingestion of certain mushrooms, the first signs of an eventually fatal
intoxication may not appear for a few days.) Intoxication effects usually resolve within hours to a
very few days. However, the body may completely eliminate an anesthetic gas such as nitrous
oxide just minutes after use ends. At the other extreme, some “hit-and-run” intoxicating
substances poison systems, leaving permanent impairments. For example, MPTP (1-methyl-4-
phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine), a contaminating by-product in the synthesis of a certain
opioid, kills dopaminergic cells and induces permanent parkinsonism in individuals who had
sought opioid intoxication.
Functional Consequences of Other (or Unknown) Substance
Intoxication
Impairment from intoxication with any substance may have serious consequences, including
dysfunction at work, social indiscretions, problems in interpersonal relationships, failure to fulfill
role obligations, traffic accidents, fighting, high-risk behaviors (i.e., having unprotected sex), and
substance or medication overdose. The pattern of consequences will vary with the particular
substance.
Differential Diagnosis
The individual used an other or unknown substance(s), but the dose was insufficient to produce
symptoms that meet the diagnostic criteria required for the diagnosis.
658
Familiar 
substances
may be sold in the black market as novel products, and individuals may experience intoxication
from those substances. History, toxicology screens, or chemical testing of the substance itself
may help to identify it. Other substance intoxication is distinguished from other
substance/medication-induced mental disorders (e.g., corticosteroid-induced anxiety disorder)
because the symptoms (e.g., anxiety) in these latter disorders are in excess of those (if known)
usually associated with the specific substance intoxication, predominate in the clinical
presentation, and are severe enough to warrant clinical attention.
Numerous neurological and other medical conditions may produce rapid onset of signs and
symptoms mimicking those of intoxications, including the examples in Criterion B.
Paradoxically, drug withdrawals also must be ruled out; for example, lethargy may indicate
withdrawal from one drug or intoxication with another substance.
Comorbidity
