As with all substance-related disorders, conduct disorder in adolescence, antisocial personality
disorder, and other substance use disorders tend to co-occur with other (or unknown) substance
intoxication.
Other (or Unknown) Substance Withdrawal
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Cessation of (or reduction in) use of a substance that has been heavy and
prolonged.
B. The development of a substance-specific syndrome shortly after the cessation of
(or reduction in) substance use.
C. The substance-specific syndrome causes clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not
better explained by another mental disorder, including withdrawal from another
substance.
E. The substance involved cannot be classified under any of the other substance
categories (alcohol; caffeine; cannabis; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or
anxiolytics; stimulants; or tobacco) or is unknown.
Specify if:
With perceptual disturbances: This specifier may be noted when
hallucinations with intact reality testing or auditory, visual, or tactile illusions
occur in the absence of a delirium.
Coding note: The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid
other (or unknown) substance use disorder and whether or not there are perceptual
disturbances.
For other (or unknown) substance withdrawal, without perceptual
disturbances: If a mild other (or unknown) substance use disorder is comorbid,
the ICD-10-CM code is F19.130, and if a moderate or severe other (or unknown)
substance use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F19.230. If there is
no comorbid other (or unknown) substance use disorder (e.g., in a patient taking
an other [or unknown] substance solely under appropriate medical supervision),
then the ICD-10-CM code is F19.930.
For 
other 
(or 
unknown) 
substance 
withdrawal, 
with 
perceptual
disturbances: If a mild other (or unknown) substance use disorder is comorbid,
the ICD-10-CM code is
659
F19.132, and if a moderate or severe other (or unknown) substance use disorder
