is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F19.232. If there is no comorbid other (or
unknown) substance use disorder (e.g., in a patient taking an other [or unknown]
substance solely under appropriate medical supervision), then the ICD-10-CM
code is F19.932.
Note: For information on Risk and Prognostic Factors and Diagnostic Markers, see the
corresponding sections in Other (or Unknown) Substance Use Disorder.
Diagnostic Features
Other (or unknown) substance withdrawal is a clinically significant syndrome that develops
during or within a few hours to days after reducing or terminating dosing with a substance
(Criteria A and B). Although recent dose reduction or termination usually is clear in the history,
other diagnostic procedures are very challenging if the drug is unknown. Criterion B requires
development of a “substance-specific syndrome” (i.e., the individual’s signs and symptoms must
correspond with the known withdrawal syndrome for the recently stopped drug)—a requirement
that rarely can be met with an unknown substance. Consequently, clinical judgment must guide
such decisions when this information is limited. Criterion D requires ruling out other medical
conditions, mental disorders, or withdrawals from familiar substances. When the substance is
known, it should be reflected in the name of the disorder upon coding (e.g., “betel nut
withdrawal”).
Prevalence
The prevalence of other (or unknown) substance withdrawal is unknown.
Development and Course
Withdrawal signs commonly appear some hours after use of the substance is terminated, but the
onset and course vary greatly, depending on the dose typically used and the rate of elimination of
the specific substance from the body. At peak severity, withdrawal symptoms from some
substances involve only moderate levels of discomfort, whereas withdrawal from other
substances may be fatal. Withdrawal-associated dysphoria often motivates relapse to substance
use. Withdrawal symptoms slowly abate over days, weeks, or months, depending on the
particular drug and doses to which the individual became tolerant.
Functional Consequences of Other (or Unknown) Substance
Withdrawal
Withdrawal from any substance may have serious consequences, including physical signs and
symptoms (e.g., malaise, vital sign changes, abdominal distress, headache), intense drug craving,
anxiety, depression, agitation, psychotic symptoms, or cognitive impairments. These
consequences may lead to problems such as dysfunction at work, problems in interpersonal
relationships, failure to fulfill role obligations, traffic accidents, fighting, high-risk behavior (e.g.,
having unprotected sex), suicide attempts, and substance or medication overdose. The pattern of
consequences will vary with the particular substance.
