Dose reduction after extended dosing, but not meeting the criteria for other (or unknown)
substance withdrawal.
Substance withdrawal or other substance/medication-induced mental disorders.
Other toxic, metabolic, traumatic, neoplastic, vascular, or infectious disorders that impair brain
function and cognition.
Differential Diagnosis
The individual used other (or unknown) substances, but the dose that was used was insufficient
to produce symptoms that meet the criteria required for the withdrawal diagnosis.
Familiar 
substances
may be sold in the black market as novel products, and individuals may experience withdrawal
when discontinuing those substances. History, toxicology screens, or
660
chemical testing of the substance itself may help to identify it. Other substance withdrawal is
distinguished from other substance/medication-induced mental disorders (e.g., venlafaxine-
induced anxiety disorder, with onset during withdrawal) because the symptoms (e.g., anxiety) in
these latter disorders are in excess of symptoms (if known) usually associated with the specific
substance withdrawal, predominate in the clinical presentation, and are severe enough to warrant
clinical attention.
Numerous neurological and other medical conditions may produce rapid onset of signs and
symptoms mimicking those of withdrawals. Paradoxically, drug intoxications also must be ruled
out; for example, lethargy may indicate withdrawal from one drug or intoxication with another
substance.
Comorbidity
As with all substance-related disorders, conduct disorder in adolescence, antisocial personality
disorder, and other substance use disorders are likely to co-occur with other (or unknown)
substance withdrawal.
Other (or Unknown) Substance–Induced Mental
Disorders
Because the category of other or unknown substances is inherently ill-defined, the extent and
range of these substance-induced mental disorders are uncertain. Nevertheless, other (or
unknown) substance–induced mental disorders are possible and are described in other chapters of
the manual with disorders with which they share phenomenology (see the substance/medication-
induced mental disorders in these chapters): other (or unknown) substance–induced psychotic
disorder (“Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders”); other (or unknown)
substance–induced bipolar and related disorder (“Bipolar and Related Disorders”); other (or
unknown) substance–induced depressive disorder (“Depressive Disorders”); other (or unknown)
substance–induced anxiety disorders (“Anxiety Disorders”); other (or unknown) substance–
induced obsessive-compulsive disorder (“Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders”); other
(or unknown) substance–induced sleep disorder (“Sleep-Wake Disorders”); other (or unknown)
substance–induced sexual dysfunction (“Sexual Dysfunctions”); and other (or unknown)
