reliving past gambling experiences, handicapping or planning the next
venture, thinking of ways to get money with which to gamble).
5. Often gambles when feeling distressed (e.g., helpless, guilty, anxious,
depressed).
6. After losing money gambling, often returns another day to get even (“chasing”
one’s losses).
7. Lies to conceal the extent of involvement with gambling.
8. Has jeopardized or lost a significant relationship, job, or educational or career
opportunity because of gambling.
9. Relies on others to provide money to relieve desperate financial situations
caused by gambling.
B. The gambling behavior is not better explained by a manic episode.
Specify if:
Episodic: Meeting diagnostic criteria at more than one time point, with
symptoms subsiding between periods of gambling disorder for at least several
months.
Persistent: Experiencing continuous symptoms, to meet diagnostic criteria for
multiple years.
Specify if:
In early remission: After full criteria for gambling disorder were previously met,
none of the criteria for gambling disorder have been met for at least 3 months
but for less than 12 months.
In sustained remission: After full criteria for gambling disorder were previously
met, none of the criteria for gambling disorder have been met during a period of
12 months or longer.
Specify current severity:
Mild: 4–5 criteria met.
Moderate: 6–7 criteria met.
Severe: 8–9 criteria met.
662
Note: Although some behavioral conditions that do not involve ingestion of substances
have similarities to substance-related disorders, only one disorder—gambling disorder—
has sufficient data to be included in this section.
Specifiers
Severity is based on the number of criteria endorsed. Individuals with mild gambling disorder
may exhibit only 4–5 of the criteria, with the most frequently endorsed criteria usually related to
preoccupation with gambling and “chasing” losses. Individuals with moderately severe gambling
disorder exhibit more of the criteria (i.e., 6–7). Individuals with the most severe form will exhibit
