all or most of the nine criteria (i.e., 8–9). Jeopardizing relationships or career opportunities
because of gambling and relying on others to provide money for gambling losses are typically
the least often endorsed criteria and most often occur among those with more severe gambling
disorder. Furthermore, individuals presenting for treatment of gambling disorder typically have
moderate to severe forms of the disorder.
Diagnostic Features
Gambling involves risking something of value in the hopes of obtaining something of greater
value. In many cultures, individuals gamble on games and events, and most do so without
experiencing problems. However, some individuals develop substantial impairment related to
their gambling behaviors. The essential feature of gambling disorder is persistent and recurrent
maladaptive gambling behavior that disrupts personal, family, and/or vocational pursuits
(Criterion A). Gambling disorder is defined as a cluster of four or more of the symptoms listed in
Criterion A occurring at any time in the same 12-month period.
A pattern of “chasing one’s losses” may develop, with an urgent need to continue gambling
(often with placing larger bets or taking greater risks) to undo a loss or series of losses. The
individual may abandon a gambling strategy and try to win back losses all at once. Although
many gamblers may “chase” for short periods of time, it is the frequent, and often long-term,
“chase” that is characteristic of gambling disorder (Criterion A6). Individuals may lie to family
members, therapists, or others to conceal the extent of involvement with gambling; these
instances of deceit may also include, but are not limited to, covering up illegal behaviors such as
forgery, fraud, theft, or embezzlement to obtain money with which to gamble (Criterion A7).
Individuals may also engage in “bailout” behavior, turning to family or others for help with a
desperate financial situation that was caused by gambling (Criterion A9).
In some cases, symptoms meeting diagnostic criteria for gambling disorder may occur as a
direct physiological consequence of taking dopaminergic medications, such as those used to treat
Parkinson’s disease. When such symptoms are induced by a medication, these cases would be
diagnosed as gambling disorder.
Associated Features
Distortions in thinking (e.g., denial, superstitions, a sense of power and control over the outcome
of chance events, overconfidence) may be present in individuals with gambling disorder. Many
individuals with gambling disorder believe that money is both the cause of and the solution to
their problems. Some individuals with gambling disorder are impulsive, competitive, energetic,
restless, and easily bored; they may be overly concerned with the approval of others and may be
generous to the point of extravagance when winning. Other individuals with gambling disorder
are depressed and lonely, and they may gamble when feeling helpless, guilty, or depressed.
Prevalence
The past-year prevalence rate of gambling disorder is about 0.2%–0.3% in the general U.S.
population, with a range of 0.1%–0.7% observed across international studies. In the
663
