general U.S. population, the lifetime prevalence rate is about 0.4%–1.0%. For women, the
lifetime prevalence rate of gambling disorder is about 0.2%, and for men it is about 0.6%. The
12-month prevalence of DSM-5 gambling disorder varies among ethnoracial groups in the
United States: it is 0.52% in African Americans, 0.25% in Latinx, and 0.23% in non-Latinx
Whites.
Development and Course
The onset of gambling disorder can occur during adolescence or young adulthood, but in other
individuals it manifests during middle or even older adulthood. Generally, gambling disorder
develops over the course of years, although the progression appears to be more rapid in women
than in men. National data from the United States and Canada show that most individuals who
develop a gambling disorder evidence a pattern of gambling that gradually increases in both
frequency and amount of wagering. Certainly, milder forms can develop into more severe cases.
Most individuals with gambling disorder report that one or two types of gambling are most
problematic for them, although some individuals participate in many forms of gambling.
Individuals are likely to engage in certain types of gambling (e.g., buying scratch tickets daily)
more frequently than others (e.g., playing slot machines or blackjack at the casino weekly).
Frequency of gambling can be related more to the type of gambling than to the severity of the
overall gambling disorder. For example, purchasing a single scratch ticket each day may not be
problematic, while less frequent casino, sports, or card gambling may be part of a gambling
disorder. Similarly, amounts of money spent wagering are not in themselves indicative of
gambling disorder. Some individuals can wager thousands of dollars per month and not have a
problem with gambling, while others may wager much smaller amounts but experience
substantial gambling-related difficulties.
Gambling patterns may be regular or episodic, and gambling disorder can be persistent or in
remission. Gambling can increase during periods of stress or depression and during periods of
substance use or abstinence. There may be periods of heavy gambling and severe problems,
times of total abstinence, and periods of nonproblematic gambling. Gambling disorder is
sometimes associated with spontaneous, long-term remissions. Nevertheless, some individuals
underestimate their vulnerability to develop gambling disorder or to relapse following remission.
When in a period of remission, they may incorrectly assume that they will have no problem
regulating gambling and that they can engage in some forms of gambling nonproblematically,
only to experience a relapse of gambling disorder.
Early expression of gambling disorder is more common among young men (ages 18–21
years) than among young women. Individuals who begin gambling in youth often do so with
family members or friends. Development of early-life gambling disorder appears to be associated
with impulsivity and substance abuse. Internet gambling has been linked to risky and
problematic gambling among youth and may be conducted in a more isolative (i.e., nonpeer)
fashion. Some video gaming characteristics (e.g., loot boxes or loot crates containing prizes
determined by chance that may be of higher or lower value or desirability) overlap with
gambling behavior and may influence the course of gambling disorder. Many high school and
college students who develop gambling disorder grow out of the disorder over time, although it
remains a lifelong problem for some. Mid- and later-life onset of gambling disorder is more
common among women than among men.
