Temperamental.
Genetic and physiological.
Course modifiers.
There are age and gender variations in the type of gambling activities and the prevalence
rates of gambling disorder. Gambling disorder in the United States is more common among
younger and middle-age individuals than among older adults. Among U.S. young adults (ages
18–21 years), the disorder is more prevalent in young men than in young women. Younger
individuals prefer different forms of gambling (e.g., sports betting), whereas older adults are
more likely to develop problems with slot machine and bingo gambling. Although the
proportions of individuals who seek treatment for gambling disorder are low across all age
groups in the United States, younger individuals are especially unlikely to present for treatment.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
664
Gambling that begins in childhood or early adolescence is associated with
increased rates of gambling disorder. Gambling disorder also appears to aggregate with
antisocial personality disorder, depressive and bipolar disorders, and other substance use
disorders, particularly alcohol use disorder.
Gambling disorder can aggregate in families, and this effect appears to
relate to both environmental and genetic factors. Gambling problems are more frequent in
monozygotic than in dizygotic twins. Gambling disorder is also more prevalent among first-
degree relatives of individuals with moderate to severe alcohol use disorder than among the
general population.
Many individuals, including adolescents and young adults, are likely to resolve
their problems with gambling disorder over time, although a strong predictor of future gambling
problems 
is 
previous 
gambling 
problems. 
Psychopathology, 
including 
attention-
deficit/hyperactivity and anxiety disorders, has been found to be associated with increased risk of
onset of gambling disorder among those who gamble and with persistence of gambling disorder
symptoms over time.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Types of gambling activities vary across cultural contexts and ethnoracial groups (e.g., pai gow,
cockfights, blackjack, horse racing). Some Indigenous populations in Canada, New Zealand, and
the United States have high prevalence rates of gambling problems, possibly related to limited
economic opportunities, the expectation that gambling may help advance social goals, and the
location of casinos on some U.S. tribal lands. U.S.-born individuals have higher rates of
gambling problems than first-generation immigrants to the United States. Endorsement of
specific disorder criteria may vary across ethnoracial groups. For example, among individuals
with gambling problems, Asian Americans may be less likely than other groups to endorse being
preoccupied with gambling (Criterion A4), while African Americans and Latinx may be more
likely to endorse repeated unsuccessful efforts to control gambling (Criterion A3).
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Men develop gambling disorder at higher rates than women, although this gender gap may be
narrowing. Data from treatment-seeking populations have suggested that women may develop
