Nondisordered gambling.
Manic episode.
gambling problems more rapidly after the onset of gambling (so-called telescoping), although
general population data suggest that men progress more rapidly to disordered gambling than
women do. Although women seek treatment sooner than men do, rates of treatment seeking in
U.S. national surveys are low (< 10%) among individuals with gambling disorder regardless of
gender.
Women may gamble as a maladaptive approach to negative affect, whereas men may gamble
more for the thrill of it. Compared with men, women may also experience more shame related to
gambling. Men tend to wager on different forms of gambling than women, with cards, sports,
and horse race gambling more prevalent among men, and slot machine and bingo gambling more
common among women. Women with gambling disorder are more likely than men with
gambling disorder to have depressive, bipolar, and anxiety disorders.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
In a U.S. study, up to half of individuals in treatment for gambling disorder in Connecticut
reported suicidal thoughts, and about 17% reported attempted suicide. A nationwide register
study in Sweden showed that compared with individuals without gambling disorder, individuals
ages 20–74 years with gambling disorder have a 15-fold increased suicide mortality rate.
665
Functional Consequences of Gambling Disorder
Areas of psychosocial, health, and mental health functioning may be adversely affected by
gambling disorder. Specifically, individuals with gambling disorder may, because of their
involvement with gambling, jeopardize or lose important relationships with family members or
friends. Such problems may occur from repeatedly lying to others to cover up the extent of
gambling or from requesting money that is used for gambling or to pay off gambling debts.
Employment or educational activities may likewise be adversely impacted by gambling disorder;
absenteeism or poor work or school performance can occur with gambling disorder, as
individuals may gamble during work or school hours or be preoccupied with gambling or its
adverse consequences when they should be working or studying. Individuals with gambling
disorder in a U.S. national sample had poor general health and utilized medical services at high
rates.
Differential Diagnosis
Gambling disorder must be distinguished from professional and social
gambling. In professional gambling, risks are limited and discipline is central. Social gambling
typically occurs with friends or colleagues and lasts for a limited period of time, with acceptable
losses. Some persons can experience problems associated with gambling (e.g., short-term
chasing behavior and loss of control) that do not meet the full criteria for gambling disorder.
Loss of judgment and excessive gambling may occur during a manic episode. An
additional diagnosis of gambling disorder should be given only if the gambling behavior is not
better explained by manic episodes (e.g., a history of maladaptive gambling behavior at times
other than during a manic episode). Alternatively, an individual with gambling disorder may,
