Neurocognitive Disorders
The neurocognitive disorders (NCDs) begin with delirium, followed by the
syndromes of major NCD, mild NCD, and their etiological subtypes. The major or mild NCD
subtypes are NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease; vascular NCD; NCD with Lewy bodies; NCD due
to Parkinson’s disease; frontotemporal NCD; NCD due to traumatic brain injury; NCD due to
HIV infection; substance/medication-induced NCD; NCD due to Huntington’s disease; NCD due
to prion disease; NCD due to another medical condition; NCD due to multiple etiologies; and
unspecified NCD. The NCD category encompasses the group of disorders in which the primary
clinical deficit is in cognitive function, and that are acquired rather than developmental.
Although cognitive deficits are present in many if not all mental disorders (e.g., schizophrenia,
bipolar disorders), only disorders whose core features are cognitive are included in the NCD
category. The NCDs are those in which impaired cognition has not been present since birth or
very early life, and thus represents a decline from a previously attained level of functioning.
The NCDs are unique among DSM-5 categories in that these are syndromes for which the
underlying pathology, and frequently the etiology as well, can potentially be determined. The
various underlying disease entities have all been the subject of extensive research, clinical
experience, and expert consensus on diagnostic criteria. The DSM-5 criteria for these disorders
have been developed in close consultation with the expert groups for each of the disease entities
and align as closely as possible with the current consensus criteria for each of them. The
potential utility of biomarkers is also discussed in relation to diagnosis. Dementia is subsumed
under the newly named entity major neurocognitive disorder, although the term dementia is not
precluded from use in the etiological subtypes in which that term is standard. Furthermore,
DSM-5 recognizes a less severe level of cognitive impairment, mild neurocognitive disorder,
which can also be a focus of care. Diagnostic criteria are provided for both these syndromic
entities, followed by diagnostic criteria for the different etiological subtypes. Several of the
NCDs frequently coexist with one another, and their relationships may be multiply characterized
under different chapter subheadings, including “Differential Diagnosis” (e.g., NCD due to
Alzheimer’s disease vs. vascular NCD), “Risk and Prognostic Factors” (e.g., vascular pathology
increasing the clinical expression of Alzheimer’s disease), or “Comorbidity” (e.g., mixed
Alzheimer’s disease–vascular pathology).
The term dementia is retained in DSM-5 for continuity and may be used in settings where
physicians and patients are accustomed to this term. Although dementia is the customary term
for disorders like the degenerative dementias that usually affect older adults, the term
neurocognitive disorder is widely used and often preferred for conditions affecting younger
individuals, such as impairment secondary to traumatic brain injury or HIV infection.
Furthermore, the major NCD definition is somewhat broader than the term dementia, in that a
diagnosis of major NCD can be made if there is a significant cognitive decline in only one
cognitive domain, whereas a diagnosis of dementia in ICD-10 and ICD-11 (and formerly in
