DSM-IV) requires multiple cognitive deficits. Thus, cases that would qualify in ICD-10 and
ICD-11 (and formerly DSM-IV) for a diagnosis of amnestic disorder (memory impairment in the
absence of other cognitive deficits) are diagnosed as major NCD in DSM-5.
668
Neurocognitive Domains
The criteria for the various NCDs are based on defined cognitive domains. Table 1 provides for
each of the key domains a working definition, examples of symptoms or observations regarding
impairments in everyday activities, and examples of assessments. The domains thus defined,
along with guidelines for clinical thresholds, form the basis on which the NCDs, their levels, and
their subtypes may be diagnosed.
669
TABLE 1 Neurocognitive domains
Cognitive domain
Examples of symptoms or observations
Examples of assessments
Complex attention
(sustained attention,
divided attention,
selective attention,
processing speed)
Major: Has increased difficulty in environments
with multiple stimuli (TV, radio, conversation);
is easily distracted by competing events in the
environment. Is unable to attend unless input is
restricted and simplified. Has difficulty holding
new information in mind, such as recalling
phone numbers or addresses just given, or
reporting what was just said. Is unable to
perform mental calculations. All thinking takes
longer than usual, and components to be
processed must be simplified to one or a few.
Mild: Normal tasks take longer than previously.
Begins to find errors in routine tasks; finds
work needs more double-checking than
previously. Thinking is easier when not
competing with other things (radio, TV, other
conversations, cell phone, driving).
Sustained attention: Maintenance of attention
over time (e.g., pressing a button every time a
tone is heard, and over a period of time).
Selective attention: Maintenance of attention
despite competing stimuli or distractors:
hearing numbers and letters read and asked to
count only letters.
Divided attention: Attending to two tasks within
the same time period: rapidly tapping while
learning a story being read. Processing speed
can be quantified on any task by timing it (e.g.,
time to put together a design of blocks; time to
match symbols with numbers; speed in
responding, such as counting speed or serial 3
speed).
Executive function
(planning, decision-
making, working
memory, responding
to feedback/error
correction, overriding
habits/inhibition,
mental flexibility)
Major: Abandons complex projects. Needs to
focus on one task at a time. Needs to rely on
others to plan instrumental activities of daily
living or make decisions.
Mild: Increased effort required to complete
multistage projects. Has increased difficulty
multitasking or difficulty resuming a task
interrupted by a visitor or phone call. May
complain of increased fatigue from the extra
effort required to organize, plan, and make
decisions. May report that large social
gatherings are more taxing or less enjoyable
because of increased effort required to follow
shifting conversations.
Planning: Ability to find the exit to a maze;
interpret a sequential picture or object
arrangement.
Decision-making: Performance of tasks that
assess process of deciding in the face of
competing alternatives (e.g., simulated
gambling).
Working memory: Ability to hold information for
a brief period and to manipulate it (e.g., adding
up a list of numbers or repeating a series of
numbers or words backward).
Feedback/error utilization: Ability to benefit
from feedback to infer the rules for solving a
problem.
Overriding habits/inhibition: Ability to choose a
more complex and effortful solution to be
correct (e.g., looking away from the direction
indicated by an arrow; naming the color of a
word’s font rather than naming the word)
