word s font rather than naming the word).
Mental/cognitive flexibility: Ability to shift
between two concepts, tasks, or response rules
(e.g., from number to letter, from verbal to key-
press response, from adding numbers to
ordering numbers, from ordering objects by size
to ordering by color).
670
Learning and memory
(immediate memory,
recent memory
[including free recall,
cued recall, and
recognition memory],
very-long-term
memory [semantic;
autobiographical],
implicit learning)
Major: Repeats self in conversation, often within
the same conversation. Cannot keep track of
short list of items when shopping or of plans
for the day. Requires frequent reminders to
orient to task at hand.
Mild: Has difficulty recalling recent events, and
relies increasingly on list making or calendar.
Needs occasional reminders or re-reading to
keep track of characters in a movie or novel.
Occasionally may repeat self over a few weeks
to the same person. Loses track of whether bills
have already been paid.
Note: Except in severe forms of major
neurocognitive disorder, semantic,
autobiographical, and implicit learning are
relatively preserved, compared with recent
memory.
Immediate memory span: Ability to repeat a list
of words or digits. Note: Immediate memory
sometimes subsumed under “working memory”
(see “Executive Function”).
Recent memory: Assesses the process of encoding
new information (e.g., word lists, a short story,
or diagrams). The aspects of recent memory
that can be tested include 1) free recall (the
individual is asked to recall as many words,
diagrams, or elements of a story as possible);
2) cued recall (examiner aids recall by
providing semantic cues such as “List all the
food items on the list” or “Name all of the
children from the story”); and 3) recognition
memory (examiner asks about specific items—
e.g., “Was ’apple’ on the list?” or “Did you see
this diagram or figure?”). Other aspects of
memory that can be assessed include semantic
memory (memory for facts), autobiographical
memory (memory for personal events or
people), and implicit (procedural) learning
(unconscious learning of skills).
Language (expressive
language [including
naming, word
finding, fluency, and
grammar, and syntax]
and receptive
language)
Major: Has significant difficulties with
expressive or receptive language. Often uses
general-use phrases such as “that thing” and
“you know what I mean,” and prefers general
pronouns rather than names. With severe
impairment, may not even recall names of
closer friends and family. Idiosyncratic word
usage, grammatical errors, and spontaneity of
output and economy of utterances occur.
Stereotypy of speech occurs; echolalia and
automatic speech typically precede mutism.
Mild: Has noticeable word-finding difficulty.
May substitute general for specific terms. May
avoid use of specific names of acquaintances.
Grammatical errors involve subtle omission or
incorrect use of articles, prepositions, auxiliary
verbs, etc.
Expressive language: Confrontational naming
(identification of objects or pictures); fluency
(e.g., name as many items as possible in a
semantic [e.g., animals] or phonemic [e.g.,
words starting with “f”] category in 1 minute).
Grammar and syntax (e.g., omission or incorrect
use of articles, prepositions, auxiliary verbs):
Errors observed during naming and fluency
tests are compared with norms to assess
frequency of errors and compare with normal
slips of the tongue.
Receptive language: Comprehension (word
definition and object-pointing tasks involving
animate and inanimate stimuli): performance of
actions/activities according to verbal command.
671
Perceptual-motor
(includes abilities
subsumed under the
terms visual
perception,
visuoconstructional,
perceptual-motor,
praxis, and gnosis)
Major: Has significant difficulties with
previously familiar activities (using tools,
driving motor vehicle), navigating in familiar
environments; is often more confused at dusk,
when shadows and lowering levels of light
change perceptions.
Mild: May need to rely more on maps or others
for directions. Uses notes and follows others to
get to a new place. May find self lost or turned
around when not concentrating on task. Is less
precise in parking. Needs to expend greater
effort for spatial tasks such as carpentry,
assembly sewing or knitting
Visual perception: Line bisection tasks can be
used to detect basic visual defect or attentional
neglect. Motor-free perceptual tasks (including
facial recognition) require the identification
and/or matching of figures—best when tasks
cannot be verbally mediated (e.g., figures are
not objects); some require the decision of
whether a figure can be “real” or not based on
dimensionality.
Visuoconstructional: Assembly of items requiring
hand-eye coordination, such as drawing,
copying, and block assembly.
