assembly, sewing, or knitting.
Perceptual-motor: Integrating perception with
purposeful movement (e.g., inserting blocks
into a form board without visual cues; rapidly
inserting pegs into a slotted board).
Praxis: Integrity of learned movements, such as
ability to imitate gestures (wave goodbye) or
pantomime use of objects to command (“Show
me how you would use a hammer”).
Gnosis: Perceptual integrity of awareness and
recognition, such as recognition of faces and
colors.
Social cognition
(recognition of
emotions, theory of
mind)
Major: Behavior clearly out of acceptable social
range; shows insensitivity to social standards of
modesty in dress or of political, religious, or
sexual topics of conversation. Focuses
excessively on a topic despite group’s
disinterest or direct feedback. Behavioral
intention without regard to family or friends.
Makes decisions without regard to safety (e.g.,
inappropriate clothing for weather or social
setting). Typically, has little insight into these
changes.
Mild: Has subtle changes in behavior or attitude,
often described as a change in personality, such
as less ability to recognize social cues or read
facial expressions, decreased empathy,
increased extraversion or introversion,
decreased inhibition, or subtle or episodic
apathy or restlessness.
Recognition of emotions: Identification of
emotion in images of faces representing a
variety of both positive and negative emotions.
Theory of mind: Ability to consider another
person’s mental state (thoughts, desires,
intentions) or experience—story cards with
questions to elicit information about the mental
state of the individuals portrayed, such as
“Where will the girl look for the lost bag?” or
“Why is the boy sad?”
672
Delirium
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A disturbance in attention (i.e., reduced ability to direct, focus, sustain, and shift
attention) accompanied by reduced awareness of the environment.
B. The disturbance develops over a short period of time (usually hours to a few
days), represents a change from baseline attention and awareness, and tends to
fluctuate in severity during the course of a day.
C. An additional disturbance in cognition (e.g., memory deficit, disorientation,
language, visuospatial ability, or perception).
D. The disturbances in Criteria A and C are not better explained by another
preexisting, established, or evolving neurocognitive disorder and do not occur in
the context of a severely reduced level of arousal, such as coma.
E. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
that the disturbance is a direct physiological consequence of another medical
condition, substance intoxication or withdrawal (i.e., due to a drug of abuse or to
a medication), or exposure to a toxin, or is due to multiple etiologies.
