Specify if:
Acute: Lasting a few hours or days.
Persistent: Lasting weeks or months.
Specify if:
Hyperactive: The individual has a hyperactive level of psychomotor activity that
may be accompanied by mood lability, agitation, and/or refusal to cooperate with
medical care.
Hypoactive: The individual has a hypoactive level of psychomotor activity that
may be accompanied by sluggishness and lethargy that approaches stupor.
Mixed level of activity: The individual has a normal level of psychomotor
activity even though attention and awareness are disturbed. Also includes
individuals whose activity level rapidly fluctuates.
Specify whether:
Substance intoxication delirium: This diagnosis should be made instead of
substance intoxication when the symptoms in Criteria A and C predominate in
the clinical picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical
attention.
Coding note: The ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance] intoxication
delirium are indicated in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-CM code
depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder
present for the same class of substance. If a mild substance use disorder is
comorbid with the substance intoxication delirium, the 4th position character is
“1,” and the clinician should record “mild [substance] use disorder” before the
substance intoxication delirium (e.g., “mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine
intoxication delirium”). If a moderate or severe substance use disorder is
comorbid with the substance intoxication delirium, the 4th position character is
“2,” and the clinician should record “moderate [substance] use disorder” or
“severe [substance] use disorder,” depending on the severity of the comorbid
substance use disorder. If there is no comorbid substance use disorder (e.g.,
after a one-time heavy use of the substance), then the 4th position character is
“9,” and the clinician should record only the substance intoxication delirium.
673
ICD-10-CM
Substance intoxication delirium
With mild use
disorder
With moderate or
severe use
disorder
Without use
disorder
Alcohol
F10.121
F10.221
F10.921
Cannabis
F12.121
F12.221
F12.921
Phencyclidine
F16.121
F16.221
F16.921
Other hallucinogen
F16.121
F16.221
F16.921
