Substance intoxication delirium.
during withdrawal from sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic taken as prescribed);
F15.921 amphetamine-type substance or other stimulant taken as prescribed;
F16.921 ketamine or other hallucinogen taken as prescribed or for medical
reasons; F19.921 for medications that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g.,
dexamethasone) and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an
etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown (or F19.931 if
during withdrawal from medications that do not fit into any of the classes,
taken as prescribed).
F05 Delirium due to another medical condition: There is evidence from the
history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is
attributable to the physiological consequences of another medical condition.
Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of
the delirium (e.g., F05 delirium due to hepatic encephalopathy). The other
medical condition should also be coded and listed separately immediately
before the delirium due to another medical condition (e.g., K72.90 hepatic
encephalopathy; F05 delirium due to hepatic encephalopathy).
F05 Delirium due to multiple etiologies: There is evidence from the history,
physical examination, or laboratory findings that the delirium has more than one
etiology (e.g., more than one etiological medical condition; another medical
condition plus substance intoxication or medication side effect).
Coding note: Use multiple separate codes reflecting specific delirium
etiologies (e.g., K72.90 hepatic encephalopathy; F05 delirium due to hepatic
failure; F10.231 alcohol withdrawal delirium). Note that the etiological medical
condition both appears as a separate code that precedes the delirium code
and is substituted into the delirium due to another medical condition rubric.
Recording Procedures
The name of the substance intoxication delirium begins with the
specific substance (e.g., cocaine) that is presumed to be causing the delirium. The diagnostic
code is selected from the table included in the criteria set, which is based on the drug class and
presence or absence of a comorbid substance use disorder. For substances that do not fit into any
of the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for “other substance” should be used; and in cases
in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific class of substance is
unknown, the category “unknown substance” should be used.
When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is
listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance intoxication
delirium, followed by the course (i.e., acute, persistent), followed by the specifier indicating level
of psychomotor activity (i.e., hyperactive, hypoactive, mixed level of activity). For example, in
the case of acute hyperactive intoxication delirium occurring in a man with a severe cocaine use
disorder, the diagnosis is F14.221 severe cocaine use disorder with cocaine intoxication delirium,
acute, hyperactive. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe cocaine use disorder is not
given. If the intoxication delirium occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a
one-time heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g.,
