Substance withdrawal delirium.
Medication-induced delirium.
F16.921 phencyclidine intoxication delirium, acute, hypoactive).
675
The name of the substance withdrawal delirium begins with the
specific substance (e.g., alcohol) that is presumed to be causing the withdrawal delirium. The
diagnostic code is selected from substance-specific codes in the coding note included in the
criteria set. When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if
any) is listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the substance withdrawal delirium,
followed by the course (i.e., acute, persistent), followed by the specifier indicating level of
psychomotor activity (i.e., hyperactive, hypoactive, mixed level of activity). For example, in the
case of acute hyperactive withdrawal delirium occurring in a man with a severe alcohol use
disorder, the diagnosis is F10.231 severe alcohol use disorder with alcohol withdrawal delirium,
acute, hyperactive. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe alcohol use disorder is not given.
The name of the medication-induced delirium begins with the
specific substance (e.g., dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing the delirium. The name
of the disorder is followed by the course (i.e., acute, persistent), followed by the specifier
indicating level of psychomotor activity (i.e., hyperactive, hypoactive, mixed level of activity).
For example, in the case of acute hyperactive medication-induced delirium occurring in a man
using dexamethasone as prescribed, the diagnosis is F19.921 dexamethasone-induced delirium,
acute, hyperactive.
Specifiers
Regarding course, in hospital settings, delirium usually lasts about 1 week, but some symptoms
often persist even after individuals are discharged from the hospital.
Individuals with delirium may rapidly switch between hyperactive and hypoactive states. The
hyperactive state may be more common or more frequently recognized and often is associated
with medication side effects and drug withdrawal. The hypoactive state may be more frequent in
older adults and is often unrecognized among older individuals in emergency departments and
hospitals.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of delirium is an acute impairment of consciousness characterized by a
disturbance in attention accompanied by reduced awareness of the environment, both core
features of normal consciousness. Because these deficits reflect an altered state of consciousness
affecting many higher cerebral cortical functions of the cerebral cortex, they are accompanied by
a change from baseline in other cognitive functions that cannot be better explained by a
preexisting or evolving neurocognitive disorder (NCD). The disturbance in attention (Criterion
A) is manifested by reduced ability to direct, focus, sustain, and shift attention. Questions must
be repeated because the individual’s attention wanders, or the individual may perseverate with an
answer to a previous question rather than appropriately shift attention. The individual is easily
distracted by irrelevant stimuli. The disturbance in awareness affects both internal thinking and
insight as well as difficulty making sense of what is happening in the external environment.
The disturbance develops over a short period of time, usually hours to a few days, and tends
