to fluctuate during the course of the day, often with worsening in the evening and night when
external orienting stimuli decrease (Criterion B). There is evidence from the history, physical
examination, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is a physiological consequence of an
underlying medical condition, substance intoxication or withdrawal, use of a medication, or a
toxin exposure, or a combination of these factors (Criterion E). The etiology should be coded
according to the etiologically appropriate subtype (i.e., substance or medication intoxication,
substance withdrawal, another medical condition, or multiple etiologies). Delirium often occurs
in the context of an underlying NCD. The impaired brain function of individuals with mild and
major NCD renders them more vulnerable to developing a delirium.
676
There is an accompanying change in at least one other area that may include memory and
learning (particularly recent memory), disorientation (particularly to time and place), alteration in
language (particularly semantic comprehension), or perceptual distortion or a perceptual-motor
disturbance (Criterion C). The perceptual disturbances accompanying delirium include
misinterpretations, illusions, or hallucinations; these disturbances are typically visual, but may
occur in other modalities as well, and range from simple and uniform to highly complex.
Normal attention/arousal, delirium, and coma lie on a continuum. Coma is defined as a state
of unconsciousness with an absence of cognition or sleep-wake cycle, along with the lack of any
meaningful response to verbal or physical stimuli. Delirium is an impaired state of consciousness
in the setting of an aroused cortex. The ability to evaluate cognition to diagnose delirium
depends on there being a level of cortical arousal and wakefulness sufficient for response to
verbal stimulation; hence, delirium should not be diagnosed in the context of coma (Criterion D).
Stuporous individuals also have a reduced level of brain arousal, but not to the extent of the
complete unconsciousness of coma. Coma and stupor can be due to neurological conditions or
drug-induced as with iatrogenic deep sedation in intensive care unit (ICU) settings or general
anesthesia. Those individuals who show only minimal responses to verbal or physical
stimulation are incapable of engaging with attempts at standardized testing or even interview.
This inability to engage should be classified as a disorder of arousal such as coma or stupor, and
not as delirium. However, delirium can be a stage that follows emergence from coma or stupor,
especially when coma is the result of a neurological condition. Further, the sleep-wake cycle
disturbance characteristic of the circadian rhythm disturbance in delirium can interfere with full
assessment of the individual if in a sleep phase, which should be distinguished from a disorder of
brain arousal.
Associated Features
Delirium is often associated with a disturbance in the sleep-wake cycle. This disturbance can
include daytime sleepiness, nighttime agitation, difficulty falling asleep, excessive sleepiness
throughout the day, or wakefulness throughout the night. In some cases, complete reversal of the
night-day sleep-wake cycle can occur. Sleep-wake cycle disturbances are very common in
delirium and have been proposed as a core criterion for the diagnosis.
The individual with delirium may exhibit emotional disturbances, such as anxiety, fear,
depression, irritability, anger, euphoria, and apathy. There may be rapid and unpredictable shifts
