from one emotional state to another. The disturbed emotional state may also be evident in calling
out, screaming, cursing, muttering, moaning, or making other sounds. These behaviors are
especially prevalent at night and under conditions in which stimulation and environmental cues
are lacking.
Prevalence
The prevalence of delirium is highest among hospitalized older individuals and varies depending
on the individuals’ characteristics, setting of care, and sensitivity of the detection method. Data
from the United States and Finland indicate that the prevalence of delirium in the community
overall is low (1%–2%). The prevalence is 8%–17% in older individuals presenting to North
American emergency departments, where the delirium often indicates a medical illness.
Based on data from various countries, the prevalence of delirium when individuals are
admitted to the hospital ranges from 18% to 35%, and estimates of the occurrence of delirium
arising during hospitalization range from 29% to 64% in general hospital populations.
Internationally, delirium occurs in 11%–51% of older individuals postoperatively and in up to
81% of those in intensive care. The prevalence of delirium ranges from 20% to 22% in
individuals in nursing homes or post–acute care settings and occurs in up to 88% of individuals
with terminal illness at the end of life. Despite having higher risk factors for delirium, such as
cardiovascular disease, sepsis, and respiratory failure, younger African Americans
677
tended to have lower rates of the occurrence of delirium compared with White individuals of
similar age in a large case series of ICU patients in the United States.
Development and Course
The majority of individuals with delirium have a full recovery with or without treatment,
especially those who are not elderly. Delirium may progress to stupor, coma, seizures, or death,
particularly if undetected and the underlying cause(s) remains untreated.
There is increasing evidence that delirium may be associated in long-term follow-up with
cognitive decline or major NCD in the elderly, particularly in those with preexisting underlying
cognitive impairment. Mortality among hospitalized individuals with delirium is high; as many
as 38%–41% of individuals with delirium die within 1 year after diagnosis; the risk of death is
particularly great among those with malignancies and other significant underlying medical
illness.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Delirium may be increased in the context of functional impairment, preexisting cognitive
impairment, sensory impairment (e.g., vision/hearing), increasing age, illness severity or
comorbidity, infection, depression, history of stroke, and history of alcohol use. Both major and
mild NCDs can increase the risk for delirium and complicate the course. Falls may be an
outcome of delirium but are not found to be a risk factor. In a meta-analysis of studies from 1990
through 2016, anticholinergic use was not a validated predictor of delirium.
Older individuals are especially susceptible to delirium compared with younger adults.
