Psychotic disorders and bipolar and depressive disorders with psychotic features.
Acute stress disorder.
Malingering and factitious disorder.
Other neurocognitive disorders.
Among children, susceptibility to delirium in infancy and through childhood may be associated
with significant childhood morbidity and mortality, whereas individuals in early adulthood
through mid-adulthood may have less susceptibility to delirium and lower mortality risk.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
The symptoms associated with delirium may vary in men and women. Men more commonly
manifest motor agitation and affective lability, whereas women more commonly manifest
hypoactive delirium. Male sex is a risk factor for delirium, and sex- or gender-related factors
may interact with other risk factors.
Diagnostic Markers
In addition to laboratory findings characteristic of underlying medical conditions (or intoxication
or 
withdrawal 
states), 
there 
is 
often 
generalized 
irregular 
theta 
slowing 
on
electroencephalography, and fast activity is occasionally found (e.g., in some cases of alcohol
withdrawal delirium). However, electroencephalography is unable to detect slowing associated
with delirium without comparison to premorbid baseline alpha rhythms unless the slowing is in
the abnormal theta or delta frequency range.
Functional Consequences of Delirium
Delirium itself is associated with increased functional decline and risk of institutional placement.
Hospitalized individuals 65 years or older with delirium are at greater risk for poor outcomes
following discharge, including mortality, institutionalization, and dementia.
Differential Diagnosis
Delirium 
that 
is
characterized by vivid hallucinations, delusions, language disturbances, and agitation must be
distinguished from brief psychotic disorder, schizophrenia,
678
schizophreniform disorder, and other psychotic disorders, as well as from manic or major
depressive episodes, with psychotic features.
Delirium associated with fear, anxiety, and dissociative symptoms, such as
depersonalization, must be distinguished from acute stress disorder, which is precipitated by
exposure to a severely traumatic event.
Delirium can be distinguished from these disorders on the basis
of the often atypical symptomatic presentation in malingering and factitious disorder and the
absence of another medical condition or substance that is etiologically related to the apparent
cognitive disturbance.
The most common differential diagnostic issue when evaluating
confusion in older adults is disentangling symptoms of delirium and major NCD. The clinician
must determine whether the individual has delirium; a delirium superimposed on a preexisting
NCD, such as that due to Alzheimer’s disease; or an NCD without delirium. The traditional
