Specify (see coding table for details):
Without behavioral disturbance: If the cognitive disturbance is not
accompanied by any clinically significant behavioral disturbance.
With behavioral disturbance (specify disturbance): If the cognitive disturbance
is accompanied by a clinically significant behavioral disturbance (e.g., psychotic
symptoms, mood disturbance, agitation, apathy, or other behavioral symptoms).
680
Coding note: Use additional code(s) to indicate clinically significant psychiatric
symptoms due to the same medical condition causing the major neurocognitive
disorder (e.g., F06.2 psychotic disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, with
delusions; F06.32 depressive disorder due to Parkinson’s disease, with major
depressive–like episode). Note: Mental disorders due to another medical
condition are included with disorders with which they share phenomenology
(e.g., for depressive disorders due to another medical condition, see the chapter
“Depressive Disorders”).
Specify current severity:
Mild: Difficulties with instrumental activities of daily living (e.g., housework,
managing money).
Moderate: Difficulties with basic activities of daily living (e.g., feeding, dressing).
Severe: Fully dependent.
Coding and Recording Procedures
The following are examples of coding and recording major neurocognitive disorders
due to an etiological subtype (for more information, see coding table on pp. 682–683
and coding notes in the specific diagnostic criteria for each major and mild
neurocognitive disorder subtype):
Major neurocognitive disorder due to probable Alzheimer’s disease,
without behavioral disturbance, mild: G30.9 Alzheimer’s disease, F02.80
major neurocognitive disorder due to probable Alzheimer’s disease, without
behavioral disturbance, mild.
Major neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury, with
behavioral disturbance, moderate: S06.2X9S diffuse traumatic brain injury
with loss of consciousness of unspecified duration, sequela; F02.81 major
neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury, with behavioral
disturbance, moderate; F06.34 bipolar and related disorder due to traumatic
brain injury, with mixed features.
Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
