Specify (behavioral disturbance cannot be coded but should still be recorded):
Without behavioral disturbance: If the cognitive disturbance is not
accompanied by any clinically significant behavioral disturbance.
With behavioral disturbance (specify disturbance): If the cognitive disturbance
is accompanied by a clinically significant behavioral disturbance (e.g., psychotic
symptoms, mood disturbance, agitation, apathy, or other behavioral symptoms).
Coding note: Use additional code(s) to indicate clinically significant psychiatric
symptoms due to the same medical condition causing the mild neurocognitive
disorder (e.g., F06.2 psychotic disorder due to traumatic brain injury, with
delusions; F06.32 depressive disorder due to HIV disease, with major
depressive–like episode). Note: Mental disorders due to another medical
condition are included with disorders with which they share phenomenology
(e.g., for depressive disorders due to another medical condition, see the chapter
“Depressive Disorders”).
Coding and Recording Procedures
The following are examples of coding and recording mild neurocognitive disorders
due to an etiological subtype (for more information, see coding table on pp. 682–683
and coding notes in the specific diagnostic criteria for each major and mild
neurocognitive disorder subtype):
G31.84 Mild neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, without
behavioral disturbance.
G31.84 Mild neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury, with
behavioral disturbance; F06.34 bipolar and related disorder due to traumatic
brain injury, with mixed features.
682
Etiological subtype
Associated
etiological medical
code for major
neurocognitive
disordera
Major
neurocognitive
disorder code
Mild neurocognitive disorder code
Alzheimer’s disease
G30.9
F02.8xb
G31.84c Do not use additional code for
Alzheimer’s disease.
Frontotemporal
degeneration
G31.09
F02.8xb
G31.84c Do not use additional code for
frontotemporal degeneration.
Lewy body disease
G31.83
F02.8xb
G31.84c Do not use additional code for
Lewy body disease.
Vascular disease
No additional
medical code.
F01.5xb Do not use
additional code for the
vascular disease.
G31.84c Do not use additional code for the
vascular disease.
Traumatic brain injury
S06.2X9S
F02.8xb
G31.84c Do not use additional code for the
traumatic brain injury.
Substance/medication-
induced
No additional
medical code.
Code based on the
type of substance
causing the major
Code based on the type of substance
causing the mild neurocognitive disorder.d
