Huntington’s disease, or a traumatic brain injury or stroke in the appropriate time period. For
other etiological subtypes (generally the neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer’s disease,
frontotemporal degeneration, and Lewy body disease), the diagnosis is based primarily on the
cognitive, behavioral, and functional symptoms. Typically, the differentiation among these
syndromes that lack an independently recognized etiological entity is clearer at the level of major
NCD than at the level of mild NCD, but sometimes characteristic symptoms and associated
features are present at the mild level as well.
NCDs are frequently managed by clinicians in multiple disciplines. For many subtypes,
multidisciplinary international expert groups have developed specialized consensus criteria based
on clinicopathological correlation with underlying brain pathology. The subtype criteria here
have been harmonized with those expert criteria.
Specifiers
Evidence for distinct behavioral features in NCDs has been recognized, particularly in the areas
of psychotic symptoms and depression. Psychotic features are common in many NCDs,
particularly at the mild-to-moderate stage of major NCDs due to Alzheimer’s disease, Lewy
body disease, and frontotemporal degeneration. If the psychotic symptoms are judged to be due
to the Alzheimer’s disease, Lewy body disease, or frontotemporal degeneration, an additional
diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, psychotic disorder due to Lewy body
disease, or psychotic disorder due to frontotemporal degeneration may be given. Paranoia and
other delusions are common features, and often a persecutory theme may be a prominent aspect
of delusional ideation. In contrast to psychotic disorders with onset in earlier life (e.g.,
schizophrenia), disorganized speech and disorganized behavior are not characteristic of
psychosis in NCDs. Hallucinations may occur in any modality, although visual hallucinations are
more common in NCDs than in depressive, bipolar, or psychotic disorders.
Mood disturbances, including depression, anxiety, and elation, may occur. Depression is
common early in the course (including at the mild NCD level) of NCD due to Alzheimer’s
disease and Parkinson’s disease, while elation may occur more commonly in frontotemporal
degeneration. If the mood disturbance is judged to be due to the Alzheimer’s disease,
Parkinson’s disease, or frontotemporal degeneration, an additional diagnosis of depressive
disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, depressive disorder due to Parkinson’s disease, or bipolar
and related disorder due to frontotemporal degeneration may be given. Mood symptoms are
increasingly recognized to be a significant feature in the earliest stages of mild NCDs such that
clinical recognition and intervention may be important.
Agitation is common in a wide variety of NCDs, particularly in major NCD of moderate to
severe severity, and often occurs in the setting of confusion or frustration. It may arise as
combative behaviors, particularly in the context of resisting caregiving duties such as bathing
and dressing. Agitation is characterized as disruptive motor or vocal activity and tends to occur
with advanced stages of cognitive impairment across all of the NCDs.
Individuals with NCD can present with a wide variety of behavioral symptoms that are the
focus of treatment. Sleep disturbance is a common symptom that can create a need for clinical
attention and may include symptoms of insomnia, hypersomnia, and circadian rhythm
disturbances.
