685
Apathy is common in mild and major NCD. It is observed particularly in NCD due to
Alzheimer’s disease and may be a prominent feature of NCD due to frontotemporal
degeneration. Apathy is typically characterized by diminished motivation and reduced goal-
directed behavior accompanied by decreased emotional responsiveness. Symptoms of apathy
may manifest early in the course of NCDs when a loss of motivation to pursue daily activities or
hobbies may be observed.
Other important behavioral symptoms include wandering, disinhibition, hyperphagia, and
hoarding. Some of these symptoms are characteristic of specific disorders, as discussed in the
relevant sections. When more than one behavioral disturbance is observed, each type should be
noted in writing with the specifier “with behavioral disturbance.”
Diagnostic Features
Major and mild NCDs exist on a spectrum of cognitive and functional impairment. Major NCD
roughly corresponds to the condition labeled in ICD-10 and ICD-11 (as well as in DSM-IV) as
dementia. The core feature of NCDs is acquired cognitive decline in one or more cognitive
domains (Criterion A) based on both 1) a concern about cognition on the part of the individual, a
knowledgeable informant, or the clinician, and 2) performance on an objective assessment that
falls below the expected level or that has been observed to decline over time. Both a concern and
objective evidence are required because they are complementary. When there is an exclusive
focus on objective testing, a disorder may go undiagnosed in high-functioning individuals whose
currently “normal” performance actually represents a substantial decline in abilities, or an illness
may be incorrectly diagnosed in individuals whose currently “low” performance does not
represent a change from their own baseline or is a result of extraneous factors like test conditions
or a passing illness. Alternatively, excessive focus on subjective symptoms may fail to diagnose
illness in individuals with poor insight, or whose informants deny or fail to notice their
symptoms, or it may be overly sensitive in the so-called worried well.
A cognitive concern differs from a complaint in that it may or may not be voiced
spontaneously. Rather, it may need to be elicited by careful questioning about specific symptoms
that commonly occur in individuals with cognitive deficits (see Table 1 in the introduction to this
chapter). For example, memory concerns include difficulty remembering a short grocery list or
keeping track of the plot of a television program; executive concerns include difficulty resuming
a task when interrupted, organizing tax records, or planning a holiday meal. At the mild NCD
level, the individual is likely to describe these tasks as being more difficult or as requiring extra
time or effort or compensatory strategies. At the major NCD level, such tasks may only be
completed with assistance or may be abandoned altogether. At the mild NCD level, individuals
and their families may not notice such symptoms or may view them as normal, particularly in the
elderly; thus, careful history taking is of paramount importance. The difficulties must represent
changes rather than lifelong patterns: the individual or informant may clarify this issue, or the
clinician can infer change from prior experience with the individual or from occupational or
other clues. It is also critical to determine that the difficulties are related to cognitive loss rather
than to motor or sensory limitations.
Neuropsychological testing, with performance compared with norms appropriate to the
