individual’s age, sex, educational attainment, and cultural background, is part of the standard
evaluation of NCDs and is particularly critical in the evaluation of mild NCD. The use of
culturally validated assessment instruments is preferred, which are available for many
racial/ethnic and linguistic populations. For major NCD, performance is typically 2 or more
standard deviations below appropriate norms (3rd percentile or below). For mild NCD,
performance typically lies in the 1–2 standard deviation range (between the 3rd and 16th
percentiles). However, neuropsychological testing is not available in all settings, and
neuropsychological thresholds are sensitive to the specific test(s) and norms employed, as well as
to test conditions, sensory limitations, and intercurrent illness. A variety of brief
686
office-based or “bedside” assessments, as described in Table 1, can also supply objective
data in settings where such testing is unavailable or infeasible. In any case, as with cognitive
concerns, objective performance must be interpreted in light of the individual’s prior
performance. Optimally, this information would be available from a prior administration of the
same test, but often it must be inferred based on appropriate norms, along with the individual’s
educational history, occupation, and other factors. Norms are more challenging to interpret in
individuals with very high or very low levels of education and in individuals being tested outside
their own language or cultural background.
Criterion B relates to the individual’s level of independence in everyday functioning.
Individuals with major NCD will have impairment of sufficient severity so as to interfere with
independence, such that others will have to take over tasks that the individuals were previously
able to complete on their own. Individuals with mild NCD will have preserved independence,
although there may be subtle interference with function or a report that tasks require more effort
or take more time than previously.
The distinction between major and mild NCD is inherently arbitrary, and the disorders exist
along a continuum. Precise thresholds are therefore difficult to determine. Careful history taking,
observation, and integration with other findings are required, and the implications of making a
diagnosis should be considered when an individual’s clinical manifestations lie at a boundary.
Associated Features
Typically the associated features that support a diagnosis of major or mild NCD will be specific
to the etiological subtype (e.g., neuroleptic sensitivity and visual hallucinations in NCD due to
Lewy body disease). Diagnostic features specific to each of the subtypes are found in the
relevant sections.
Prevalence
The prevalence of NCD varies widely by age and by etiological subtype. Overall prevalence
estimates are generally only available for older populations. Among individuals older than 60
years, prevalence increases steeply with age, so prevalence estimates are more accurate for
narrow age bands than for broad categories such as “over 65” (where the mean age can vary
greatly with the life expectancy of the given population). For those etiological subtypes
occurring across the life span, prevalence estimates for NCD are likely to be available, if at all,
