only as the fraction of individuals who develop NCD among those with the relevant condition
(e.g., traumatic brain injury, HIV infection).
Female gender is associated with higher prevalence of dementia overall, and especially
Alzheimer’s disease, but this difference is largely, if not wholly, attributable to greater longevity
in females.
Overall, international prevalence estimates for dementia (which is largely congruent with
major NCD) are approximately 1%–2% at age 65 years and as high as 30% by age 85 years. The
prevalence of mild NCD is very sensitive to the definition of the disorder, particularly in
community settings, where evaluations are less detailed. In addition, in contrast with clinical
settings, where cognitive concern must be high to seek and locate care, there may be a less clear
decline from baseline functioning. Estimates of the prevalence of mild cognitive impairment
(which is substantially congruent with mild NCD) among older individuals are fairly variable,
ranging from 2% to 10% at age 65 and 5% to 25% by age 85.
Prevalence and incidence of dementia vary cross-nationally and among ethnic and racialized
populations in the United States, although methodological differences complicate rate
comparisons. Some U.S. studies found that incidence is highest in African Americans followed,
in decreasing order, by American Indians/Alaska Natives, Latinx, Pacific Islanders, non-Latinx
Whites, and Asian Americans. Among four Asian American populations, Filipino Americans had
the highest incidence, followed by Japanese Americans, Chinese
687
Americans, and Asian-Indian Americans. Latinx subpopulations in the United States have
been found to vary considerably in prevalence and incidence of dementia; Caribbean Hispanics
have much higher rates than Mexican Americans in some U.S. studies.
Development and Course
The course of NCD varies across etiological subtypes, and this variation can be useful in
differential diagnosis. Some subtypes (e.g., those related to traumatic brain injury or stroke)
typically begin at a specific time and (at least after initial symptoms related to inflammation or
swelling subside) remain static. Others may fluctuate over time (although if this occurs, the
possibility of delirium superimposed on NCD should be considered). NCDs due to
neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer’s disease or frontotemporal degeneration typically are
marked by insidious onset and gradual progression, and the pattern of onset of cognitive deficits
and associated features helps to distinguish among them.
NCDs with onset in childhood and adolescence may have broad repercussions for social and
intellectual development, and in this setting intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual
disability) or other neurodevelopmental disorders may also be diagnosed to capture the full
diagnostic picture and ensure the provision of a broad range of services. In older individuals,
NCDs often occur in the setting of medical illnesses, frailty, and sensory loss, which complicate
the clinical picture for diagnosis and treatment.
When cognitive loss occurs in youth to midlife, individuals and families are likely to seek
care. NCDs are typically easiest to identify at younger ages, although in some settings
malingering or factitious disorder may be a concern. Very late in life, cognitive symptoms may
