not cause concern or may go unnoticed. In late life, mild NCD must also be distinguished from
the more modest deficits associated with “normal aging,” although a substantial fraction of what
has been ascribed to normal aging likely represents prodromal phases of various NCDs. In
addition, it becomes harder to recognize mild NCD with age because of the increasing
prevalence of medical illness and sensory deficits. It becomes harder to differentiate among
subtypes with age because there are multiple potential sources of neurocognitive decline.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Risk factors vary not only by etiological subtype but also by age at onset within etiological
subtypes. Some subtypes are distributed throughout the life span, whereas others occur
exclusively or primarily in late life. Even within the NCDs of aging, the relative prevalence
varies with age: Alzheimer’s disease is uncommon before age 60 years, and the prevalence
increases steeply thereafter, while the overall less common frontotemporal degeneration has
earlier onset and represents a progressively smaller fraction of NCDs with age. The strongest risk
factor for major and mild NCDs is age, primarily because age increases the risk of
neurodegenerative and cerebrovascular disease.
Risk of NCDs varies by ethnic and racialized background and is associated with variation in
risk of underlying diseases (e.g., hypertension, diabetes), predisposing conditions (e.g., head
injury), environment (e.g., access to nutritious food, safe spaces for exercise), and other factors.
For example, in the United States, African Americans and Latinx tend to be at higher risk for
vascular dementia than Whites. Lower education and literacy are risk factors for NCDs that also
can vary by ethnoracial group because of differential exposure to adverse social determinants of
health.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Individuals’ and families’ level of awareness and concern about neurocognitive symptoms may
vary across ethnic, racialized, and occupational groups. Cultural differences regarding whether
decreased cognitive ability is seen as a normal part of aging (“normalization”) and in dementia-
related stigma can delay families’ recognition of a problem and
688
decrease help seeking for individuals in the early stages of cognitive loss. For example, social
stigma appears to be associated with underutilization of services for cognitive impairment among
some underserved ethnic and racialized groups (e.g., Chinese Americans, Korean Americans).
Neurocognitive symptoms are more likely to be noticed, particularly at the mild level, in
individuals who engage in complex occupational, domestic, or recreational activities. In addition,
norms for neuropsychological testing tend to be available only for broad populations, and thus
they may not be easily applicable to individuals with less than high school education or those
being evaluated outside their primary language or culture. Culturally related diagnostic
challenges include accounting for intraethnic variation in the interpretation of assessments;
evaluating the effect on neuropsychological testing of a) the test taker’s stereotype threat (i.e.,
anxiety from concerns that he or she will confirm the negative stereotype of the ethnic or
racialized group by underperforming) and/or b) the clinician’s implicit (unconscious) bias on test
