interpretation; and selecting the appropriate language when assessing bilingual individuals.
Bilingual individuals with dementia may lose their facility with acquired nonnative
languages, which might affect their ability to communicate with caregivers. The caregiving
environment may be influenced by cultural norms of family responsibility to care for the elderly,
for example, by affecting the decision whether to care for the elder with NCD at home or in a
care facility. In some cultures, adult children are expected to provide care for their older parents
(e.g., filial piety) so that a functional limitation may not be as obvious to the dependent elder or
the family.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Some studies show that men and women experience major and mild NCD differently. Sex- and
gender-related factors may influence incidence and prevalence, the etiology (risk and protective
factors), and the clinical manifestations of major and mild NCD. More women than men
experience major NCD because of their longer life span. Thus, a woman of a given age has a
higher cumulative risk of developing major NCD before death than a man of the same age. The
difference in incidence rates is less clear and may vary across populations and over time because
of gender-related factors (e.g., education, occupation, family role, stress). For example, the
incidence of dementia in several higher-income countries has declined in the past 30 years, and
the decline was different in men and women across countries. Women tend to express a broader
range of symptoms. In particular, women tend to manifest more psychiatric symptoms such as
depression, anxiety, and delusions. Men tend to manifest more aggression, apathy, and
vegetative symptoms.
Like age, culture, and occupation, sex and gender issues may affect the level of concern and
awareness of cognitive symptoms. In addition, for late-life NCDs, women are likely to be older,
to have more medical comorbidity, and to live alone, which can complicate evaluation and
treatment. In addition, there are sex and gender differences in the frequency of some of the
etiological subtypes.
Diagnostic Markers
In addition to a careful history, neuropsychological assessments are the key measures for
diagnosis of NCDs, particularly at the mild level, where functional changes are minimal and
symptoms more subtle. Ideally, individuals will be referred for formal neuropsychological
testing, which will provide a quantitative assessment of all relevant domains and thus help with
diagnosis; provide guidance to the family on areas where the individual may require more
support; and serve as a benchmark for further decline or response to therapies. When such testing
is unavailable or not feasible, the brief assessments in Table 1 can provide insight into each
domain. More global brief mental status tests may be helpful but may be
689
insensitive, particularly to modest changes in a single domain or in those with high premorbid
abilities, and may be overly sensitive in those with low premorbid abilities.
In distinguishing among etiological subtypes, additional diagnostic markers may come into
play, particularly neuroimaging studies such as magnetic resonance imaging scans and positron
