Normal cognition.
Delirium.
Major depressive disorder.
Specific learning disorder and other neurodevelopmental disorders.
emission tomography scans. In addition, specific markers may be involved in the assessment of
specific subtypes and may become more important as additional research findings accumulate
over time, as discussed in the relevant sections.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Large-scale studies indicate elevated rates of suicidal behavior in individuals with NCD due to a
variety of etiologies compared with persons without an NCD. A nationwide study in Taiwan
reported that attempted suicide in late life is associated with subsequent dementia.
Functional Consequences of Major and Mild Neurocognitive Disorders
By definition, major and mild NCDs affect functioning, given the central role of cognition in
human life. Thus, the criteria for the disorders, and the threshold for differentiating mild from
major NCD, are based in part on functional assessment. Within major NCD there is a broad
range of functional impairment, as implemented in the severity specifiers. In addition, the
specific functions that are compromised can help identify the cognitive domains affected,
particularly when neuropsychological testing is not available or is difficult to interpret.
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis between normal cognition and mild NCD, as
between mild and major NCD, is challenging because the boundaries are inherently arbitrary.
Careful history taking and objective assessment are critical to these distinctions. A longitudinal
evaluation using quantified assessments may be key in detecting mild NCD.
Both mild and major NCD may be difficult to distinguish from a persistent delirium,
which can co-occur. Careful assessment of attention and arousal will help to make the
distinction.
The distinction between mild NCD and major depressive disorder,
which may co-occur with NCD, can also be challenging. Specific patterns of cognitive deficits
may be helpful. For example, consistent memory and executive function deficits are typical of
Alzheimer’s disease, whereas nonspecific or more variable performance is seen in major
depression. Alternatively, treatment of the depressive disorder with repeated observation over
time may be required to make the diagnosis.
A careful clarification of the
individual’s baseline status will help distinguish an NCD from a specific learning disorder or
other neurodevelopmental disorders. Additional issues may enter the differential for specific
etiological subtypes, as described in the relevant sections.
Comorbidity
NCDs are common in older individuals and thus often co-occur with a wide variety of age-
related diseases that may complicate diagnosis or treatment. Most notable of these is delirium,
for which NCD increases the risk. In older individuals, a delirium during hospitalization is, in
many cases, the first time that an NCD is noticed, although a careful history will often reveal
evidence of earlier decline. Mixed NCDs are also common in older
