690
individuals, as many etiological entities increase in prevalence with age. In younger individuals,
NCD often co-occurs with neurodevelopmental disorders; for example, a head injury in a
preschool child may also lead to significant developmental and learning issues. Additional
comorbidity of NCD is often related to the etiological subtype, as discussed in the relevant
sections.
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Alzheimer’s
Disease
Diagnostic Criteria
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. There is insidious onset and gradual progression of impairment in one or more
cognitive domains (for major neurocognitive disorder, at least two domains must
be impaired).
C. Criteria are met for either probable or possible Alzheimer’s disease as follows:
For major neurocognitive disorder:
Probable Alzheimer’s disease is diagnosed if either of the following is present;
otherwise, possible Alzheimer’s disease should be diagnosed.
1. Evidence of a causative Alzheimer’s disease genetic mutation from family
history or genetic testing.
2. All three of the following are present:
a. Clear evidence of decline in memory and learning and at least one other
cognitive domain (based on detailed history or serial neuropsychological
testing).
b. Steadily progressive, gradual decline in cognition, without extended
plateaus.
c. No evidence of mixed etiology (i.e., absence of other neurodegenerative
or cerebrovascular disease, or another neurological, mental, or systemic
disease or condition likely contributing to cognitive decline).
For mild neurocognitive disorder:
Probable Alzheimer’s disease is diagnosed if there is evidence of a causative
Alzheimer’s disease genetic mutation from either genetic testing or family history.
Possible Alzheimer’s disease is diagnosed if there is no evidence of a
causative Alzheimer’s disease genetic mutation from either genetic testing or
family history, and all three of the following are present:
1. Clear evidence of decline in memory and learning.
2. Steadily progressive, gradual decline in cognition, without extended plateaus.
