3. No evidence of mixed etiology (i.e., absence of other neurodegenerative or
cerebrovascular disease, or another neurological or systemic disease or
condition likely contributing to cognitive decline).
D. The disturbance is not better explained by cerebrovascular disease, another
neurodegenerative disease, the effects of a substance, or another mental,
neurological, or systemic disorder.
Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
For major neurocognitive disorder due to probable or possible Alzheimer’s disease,
with behavioral disturbance, code first G30.9 Alzheimer’s disease, followed by
F02.81. For major neurocognitive disorder due to probable or possible Alzheimer’s
disease, without behavioral disturbance, code first G30.9 Alzheimer’s disease,
followed by F02.80.
691
Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be coded for
major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
For mild neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, code G31.84. (Note:
Do not use the additional code for Alzheimer’s disease. “With behavioral
disturbance” and “without behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but should still
be recorded.)
For major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease: Use additional
code(s) to indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to Alzheimer’s
disease (e.g., F06.2 psychotic disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, with delusions;
F06.32 depressive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, with major depressive–like
episode).
Diagnostic Features
Beyond the neurocognitive disorder (NCD) syndrome (Criterion A), the core features of major or
mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease include an insidious onset and gradual progression of
cognitive and behavioral symptoms (Criterion B). The typical presentation is amnestic (i.e., with
impairment in memory and learning). Unusual nonamnestic presentations, particularly
visuospatial and logopenic aphasic variants, also exist. A significant proportion of individuals,
likely more than half, first present with behavioral symptoms before the onset of cognitive
symptoms; the presence of behavioral disturbance should be noted using the appropriate specifier
codes. At the mild NCD phase, Alzheimer’s disease manifests typically with impairment in
memory and learning, sometimes accompanied by deficits in executive function. At the major
NCD phase, visuoconstructional/perceptual-motor ability and language (e.g., word retrieval) will
also be impaired, particularly when the NCD is moderate to severe. Social cognition tends to be
preserved until late in the course of the disease with the exception of individuals who have the
less common variants with significant dysexecutive and behavioral disturbance.
A level of diagnostic certainty must be specified denoting Alzheimer’s disease as the
“probable” or “possible” etiology (Criterion C). Probable Alzheimer’s disease is diagnosed in
