both major and mild NCD if there is evidence of a causative Alzheimer’s disease gene, either
from genetic testing or from an autosomal dominant family history coupled with autopsy
confirmation or a genetic test in an affected family member. At present, the designation of
“probable” represents the highest level of diagnostic certainty within the current criteria
framework. However, current developments in biomarkers continue to increase diagnostic
certainty (e.g., when brain positron emission tomography [PET] scans may indicate the presence
of Alzheimer’s pathology, such as evidence of amyloid and/or tau deposition by imaging or
cerebrospinal [CSF] analysis). For major NCD, a typical clinical picture, without extended
plateaus or evidence of mixed etiology, can also be diagnosed as due to probable Alzheimer’s
disease. However, in some individuals there may be prolonged periods of very slow or minimal
progression. For mild NCD, given the lesser degree of certainty that the deficits will progress,
these features are only sufficient for a possible Alzheimer’s etiology. As stated above, however,
new biomarker methods may affect the use of “probable” and “possible” in mild NCD. If the
etiology appears mixed, mild NCD due to multiple etiologies should be diagnosed. In any case,
for both mild and major NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease, the clinical features must not suggest
another primary etiology for the NCD (Criterion D). As biomarker data continue to inform the
nature of underlying pathologies, it is likely that the existence of multiple etiologies will be more
systematically mapped in the future to better identify diagnostic variations in NCD due to
multiple etiologies.
Associated Features
For individuals with NCD due to Alzheimer's disease, symptoms extend beyond cognitive
deficits to include neuropsychiatric symptoms such as agitation, apathy, depression, delusions,
and sleep disorders. Neuropsychiatric symptoms may also be described as
692
behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia and have been observed in neurocognitive
disorders of all etiologies. These symptoms are nearly universal in Alzheimer's disease as
confirmed in two U.S. population samples, with 5-year follow-up in one reporting that 98% of
individuals with NCD due to Alzheimer's disease develop neuropsychiatric symptoms.
Neuropsychiatric symptoms lead to disability, worsening quality of life, greater impairment in
activities of daily living, faster cognitive and functional decline, greater caregiver burden, earlier
institutionalization, and accelerated mortality. Neuropsychiatric symptoms are often more
distressing than cognitive manifestations and are frequently the reason that health care assistance
is sought. These symptoms are also frequently present at the mild NCD stage, with evidence
suggesting that more than half of individuals who develop dementia begin with neuropsychiatric
symptoms. At the mild NCD stage or the mildest level of major NCD, depression, irritability,
and/or apathy are most often seen. With moderately severe major NCD, delusions, agitation,
combativeness, and wandering are common. Late in the illness, gait disturbance, dysphagia,
incontinence, myoclonus, and seizures are observed.
Prevalence
The prevalence of overall NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease rises steeply with age. In high-
