income countries, it ranges from 5% to 10% in individuals ages 60–69 years to at least 25%
thereafter. An estimated 5.4 million Americans of all ages had dementia due to Alzheimer’s
disease in 2016, including about 200,000 individuals with disease onset before age 65. Dementia
due to Alzheimer’s disease is found in 11% of individuals age 65 and older and 32% of those age
85 and older. Estimates applying incidence rates of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease to U.S.
census data indicate that 81% of those with the disease are age 75 or older. The percentage of
dementias attributable to Alzheimer’s disease ranges from about 60% to over 90%, depending on
the setting and diagnostic criteria. Mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease is likely to represent a
substantial fraction of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) as well.
Studies show that prevalence of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease tends to vary by
ethnoracial background; for example, in the United States, prevalence in individuals age 65 years
and older ranges from 3.5% to 14.4%, depending on ethnoracial group, age, and assessment
methodology. Higher prevalence has been found among African Americans and U.S. Latinx of
Caribbean origin, after adjustment for gender and clinical comorbidities.
Development and Course
Major or mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease progresses gradually, at times with plateaus,
through severe dementia to death. The mean duration of survival after diagnosis is approximately
10 years, reflecting the advanced age of the majority of individuals rather than the course of the
disease; some individuals can live with the disease for as long as 20 years. Late-stage individuals
are eventually mute and bedbound. Death most commonly results from aspiration in those who
survive through the full course. In mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease, impairments increase
over time, and functional status gradually declines until symptoms reach the threshold for the
diagnosis of major NCD.
The onset of symptoms is usually at ages 70 through 89; early-onset forms seen in
individuals ages 40–59 are often, but not always, related to known causative mutations.
Symptoms and pathology do not differ much by onset ages. However, younger individuals are
more likely to survive the full course of the disease, while older individuals are more likely to
have numerous medical comorbidities that affect the course and management of the illness.
Diagnostic complexity is higher in older adults because of the increased likelihood of comorbid
medical illness and mixed pathology. Age at symptom onset, rate of cognitive decline, and
survival rates appear to vary by ethnoracial background. For example, compared
693
with non-Latinx Whites, U.S. Latinx can develop Alzheimer’s disease symptoms up to 4
years earlier, African Americans tend to show slower cognitive decline, and both underserved
groups may have longer survival periods.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
A number of risk factors have been identified, including low educational status, midlife
hypertension, obesity, and hearing loss, as well as late-life smoking, depression, physical
inactivity, social isolation, and diabetes. The co-occurrence of multiple vascular risk factors also
increases risk for Alzheimer’s disease and may act by increasing cerebrovascular pathology or
