Genetic and physiological.
also through direct effects on Alzheimer’s pathology. Traumatic brain injury, especially in men,
may increase risk for major or mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease, although this relationship
remains controversial.
Age is definitively the strongest risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease, as
the prevalence estimates demonstrate. A strong genetic predisposition (60%–80% of attributable
risk) has been demonstrated. Rare mutations on chromosomes 1, 14, and 21 follow Mendelian
inheritance, leading to autosomal dominant forms. Individuals with Down syndrome (trisomy
21) may develop Alzheimer’s disease if they survive to midlife. The most common risk factors
are polygenic, with more than 45 risk genes/loci having been identified, typically with small
effects on risk. The strongest genetic susceptibility polymorphism, apolipoprotein E4
(APOE*E4), increases risk and decreases age at onset, particularly in homozygous individuals,
although some homozygous individuals survive to advanced ages without developing symptoms.
Ethnoracial and national origin are related to the genetic susceptibility profile for
Alzheimer’s disease. While APOE*E4 is associated with Alzheimer’s disease risk, this
association has not been consistently found across all ethnic and racialized groups. For example,
some studies have identified a unique mutation in the Gly206Ala presenilin 1 gene among
individuals of Puerto Rican descent with Alzheimer’s disease, which is also related to early
onset. Moreover, some studies have found a stronger association with ABCA7, a protein
transporter gene, among individuals who identify as African American than among U.S. Whites.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Detection of an NCD may be more difficult in cultural and socioeconomic settings where
memory loss is considered normal in old age, where older adults face fewer cognitive demands
in everyday life, or where very low educational levels pose greater challenges to objective
cognitive assessment.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Women were found to have a higher incidence of Alzheimer’s disease than men in several
European studies, but the incidence was similar in men and women in most North American
studies. Some studies suggested that the symptoms of dementia progress faster in women than in
men. However, because women perform better than men of the same age on some verbal
memory tests, it is also possible that gender differences reflect the cut-off scores of tests used to
support a diagnosis. Different cut-off scores may be useful in men and women when assessing
for mild cognitive impairment.
Diagnostic Markers
Amyloid-predominant neuritic plaques, tau-predominant neurofibrillary tangles, and neuronal
loss observed microscopically or manifested in regional cortical atrophy (e.g., hippocampal,
parietal, frontal) are hallmarks of the pathological diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease and may be
confirmed via postmortem histopathological examination. For
694
early-onset cases with apparent autosomal dominant inheritance, a mutation in one of the known
