Other neurocognitive disorders.
causative Alzheimer’s disease genes—amyloid precursor protein (APP), presenilin 1 (PSEN1),
or presenilin 2 (PSEN2)—may be involved, and genetic testing for such mutations is
commercially available, although usually without clinical utility. While APOE E*4 cannot serve
as a diagnostic marker because it is a risk factor (i.e., neither necessary nor sufficient for disease
occurrence), in rare instances genetic testing at this locus may have utility in clinical settings.
Since amyloid beta-42 deposition in the brain occurs early in the pathophysiological cascade,
amyloid-based diagnostic tests such as amyloid imaging on brain PET scans and reduced levels
of amyloid beta-42 in the CSF may have diagnostic value. Similarly, tau PET imaging or CSF
analyses for elevated total tau or phospho-tau levels are available for clinical use. Signs of
neuronal injury, such as hippocampal and temporoparietal cortical atrophy on a magnetic
resonance image scan and temporoparietal hypometabolism on a fluorodeoxyglucose PET scan,
provide evidence of neuronal damage but are less specific for Alzheimer’s disease. Most of these
biomarkers have been validated and are widely available in tertiary care settings. Blood-derived
biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease are being developed and are likely to become clinically
available as diagnostic, prognostic, and theranostic indicators.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Alzheimer’s disease is associated with a moderate risk of suicide even many years after the
diagnosis; thus, ongoing assessment of mood and suicidality is appropriate. A large population
study in Denmark found that the risk of suicide in individuals with a hospital-determined
diagnosis of dementia was three- to eightfold greater compared with persons without dementia.
In contrast, several other studies found mixed results regarding suicide risk in individuals with
Alzheimer’s disease. A review of the neurobiology of suicide in the elderly found preliminary
evidence of an association with cognitive deficits and elderly suicidal behavior, especially
regarding impaired decision-making and reduced cognitive inhibition.
Functional Consequences of Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
Due to Alzheimer’s Disease
Because of the effect on cognition, behavior, and functioning, NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease
has a serious and substantial impact on individuals, their caregivers, and families. Early in the
disease course, memory loss, disorientation, and mood symptoms adversely impact
independence, and create safety concerns (e.g., around driving). For individuals with onset at
younger ages, NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease can lead to early retirement. As the disease
advances, individuals become increasingly disabled in instrumental and basic daily living
activities, slowly becoming fully dependent on others. Caregivers for individuals with NCD due
to Alzheimer’s disease often see their social network deteriorate and develop a series of health
and mental health problems that can adversely affect outcomes for both the caregiver and the
individual with the NCD.
Differential Diagnosis
Major and mild NCDs due to other neurodegenerative processes
(e.g., Lewy body disease, frontotemporal degeneration) share the insidious onset and gradual
decline caused by Alzheimer’s disease but have distinctive core features of their own (which are
