Other concurrent, active neurological or systemic illness.
Major depressive disorder.
not always present). For example, NCD with Lewy bodies is typically characterized by frequent
fluctuations in cognition early in the disease, parkinsonian features, gait imbalances, and visual
hallucinations. Individuals with frontotemporal NCD may present with a distinct behavioral or
language variant. The behavioral variant typically
695
first manifests with prominent changes in social behavior, such as disinhibition, apathy, or
perseverative behavior, that may not infrequently lead to a primary psychiatric diagnosis. In
contrast, the language variant of frontotemporal NCD may manifest with impairments in
expressive language or word comprehension.
In major or mild vascular NCD, there is typically a history of stroke temporally related to the
onset of cognitive impairment, and infarcts or hemosiderin deposits observed on brain imaging
can be judged sufficient to account for the clinical picture. However, major or mild vascular
NCD shares many clinical features with Alzheimer’s disease; frequently Alzheimer’s pathology
is present alone or in combination with vascular pathologies. It should be noted that white matter
change alone does not constitute enough evidence of cerebrovascular disease to propose a mixed
etiology if the other diagnostic considerations support the diagnosis of NCD due to Alzheimer’s
disease. The presence of subcortical ischemic changes on neuroimaging must be interpreted
carefully in view of whether concurrent Alzheimer’s pathology is present.
Other neurological or systemic illness
should be considered if there is an appropriate temporal relationship and severity to account for
the clinical picture. At the mild NCD level, it may be difficult to distinguish an Alzheimer’s
disease etiology from that of another medical condition (e.g., thyroid disorders, vitamin B12
deficiency).
Particularly at the mild NCD level, the differential diagnosis also
includes major depression. The presence of depression may be associated with reduced daily
functioning and poor concentration that may resemble an NCD, but improvement with treatment
of depression may be useful in making the distinction. If the symptoms meeting criteria for a
major depressive episode are judged to be due to the physiological effects of Alzheimer’s
disease, a diagnosis of depressive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, with major depressive–
like episode, should be given instead of major depressive disorder.
Comorbidity
Most individuals with Alzheimer’s disease are elderly and have multiple medical conditions that
can complicate diagnosis and influence the clinical course. Major or mild NCD due to
Alzheimer’s disease commonly co-occurs with cerebrovascular disease, which contributes to the
clinical picture. When a comorbid condition contributes to the NCD in an individual with
Alzheimer’s disease, then NCD due to multiple etiologies should be diagnosed.
Major or Mild Frontotemporal Neurocognitive Disorder
