Diagnostic Criteria
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. The disturbance has insidious onset and gradual progression.
C. Either (1) or (2):
1. Behavioral variant:
a. Three or more of the following behavioral symptoms:
i. Behavioral disinhibition.
ii. Apathy or inertia.
iii. Loss of sympathy or empathy.
696
iv. Perseverative, stereotyped or compulsive/ritualistic behavior.
v. Hyperorality and dietary changes.
b. Prominent decline in social cognition and/or executive abilities.
2. Language variant:
a. Prominent decline in language ability, in the form of speech production,
word finding, object naming, grammar, or word comprehension.
D. Relative sparing of learning and memory and perceptual-motor function.
E. The disturbance is not better explained by cerebrovascular disease, another
neurodegenerative disease, the effects of a substance, or another mental,
neurological, or systemic disorder.
Probable frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder is diagnosed if either of the
following is present; otherwise, possible frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder
should be diagnosed:
1. Evidence of a causative frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder genetic mutation,
from either family history or genetic testing.
2. Evidence of disproportionate frontal and/or temporal lobe involvement from
neuroimaging.
Possible frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder is diagnosed if there is no
evidence of a genetic mutation, and neuroimaging has not been performed.
Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
For major neurocognitive disorder due to probable or possible frontotemporal
degeneration, with behavioral disturbance, code first G31.09 frontotemporal
degeneration, followed by F02.81. For major neurocognitive disorder due to probable
or possible frontotemporal degeneration, without behavioral disturbance, code first
G31.09 frontotemporal degeneration, followed by F02.80.
Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be coded for
major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
