For mild neurocognitive disorder due to frontotemporal degeneration, code G31.84.
(Note: Do not use the additional code for frontotemporal degeneration. “With
behavioral disturbance” and “without behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but
should still be recorded.)
For major or mild frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder: Use additional code(s) to
indicate 
clinically 
significant 
psychiatric 
symptoms 
due 
to 
frontotemporal
degeneration (e.g., F06.33 bipolar and related disorder due to frontotemporal
degeneration, with manic features; F07.0 personality change due to frontotemporal
degeneration, disinhibited type).
Diagnostic Features
Major or mild frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder (NCD) comprises a number of syndromic
variants characterized by the progressive development of behavioral and personality change
and/or language impairment. The behavioral variant and two language variants (semantic and
agrammatic/nonfluent) exhibit distinct patterns of brain atrophy and some distinctive
neuropathology. The criteria must be met for either the behavioral or the language variant to
make the diagnosis, but many individuals present with features of both.
Individuals with behavioral-variant major or mild frontotemporal NCD present with varying
degrees of apathy or disinhibition. They may lose interest in socialization, self-care, and personal
responsibilities, or display socially inappropriate behaviors. Insight is usually impaired, and this
often delays medical consultation. The first referral is often to a psychiatrist. Individuals may
develop changes in social style, and in religious and political
697
beliefs, with repetitive movements, hoarding, changes in eating behavior, and hyperorality. In
later stages, loss of sphincter control may occur. Cognitive decline is less prominent, and formal
testing may show relatively few deficits in the early stages. Common neurocognitive symptoms
are lack of planning and organization, distractibility, and poor judgment. Deficits in executive
function, such as poor performance on tests of mental flexibility, abstract reasoning, and
response inhibition, are present, but learning and memory are relatively spared, and perceptual-
motor abilities are almost always preserved in the early stages.
Individuals with language-variant major or mild frontotemporal NCD present with primary
progressive aphasia with gradual onset, with two subtypes commonly described: semantic variant
and agrammatic/nonfluent variant; each variant has distinctive features and corresponding
neuropathology. A third form of progressive language decline, called logopenic progressive
aphasia, is associated with left temporoparietal dysfunction and is often caused by Alzheimer’s
disease pathology.
“Probable” is distinguished from “possible” frontotemporal NCD by the presence of
causative genetic factors (e.g., mutations in the gene coding for microtubule-associated protein
tau) or by the presence of distinctive atrophy or reduced activity in frontotemporal regions on
structural or functional imaging.
Associated Features
