Genetic and physiological.
Extrapyramidal features may be prominent in some cases, with an overlap with syndromes such
as progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration. Features of motor neuron
disease may be present in some cases (e.g., muscle atrophy, weakness). A subset of individuals
develop visual hallucinations.
Prevalence
Major or mild frontotemporal NCD is a common cause of early-onset NCD in individuals
younger than 65 years. In international studies, population prevalence estimates are in the range
of 2–31 per 100,000, with overall rates generally noted to be equal in men and women, although
variation exists among studies. Approximately 20%–25% of cases of frontotemporal NCD occur
in individuals older than 65 years. Frontotemporal NCD accounts for about 5% of all cases of
dementia in unselected autopsy series. The behavioral variant is the most common presentation
of NCD due to frontotemporal degeneration, occurring in approximately 60% of cases.
Development and Course
Individuals with major or mild frontotemporal NCD commonly present in their 50s, although the
age at onset varies from the 20s through the 80s. The disease is gradually progressive, with
median survival being 6–11 years after symptom onset and 3–4 years after diagnosis. Survival is
shorter and decline is faster in major or mild frontotemporal NCD than in typical Alzheimer’s
disease.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Approximately 40% of individuals with major or mild frontotemporal
NCD have a family history of early-onset NCD, and approximately 10% show an autosomal
dominant inheritance pattern. A number of genetic factors have been identified, such as
mutations in the gene encoding the microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT), the granulin
gene (GRN), and the C9ORF72 gene (C9orf72). A number of families with causative mutations
have been identified (see the section “Diagnostic Markers” for this disorder), but many
individuals with known familial transmission do not have a known mutation. The presence of
motor neuron disease is associated with a more rapid deterioration.
698
Diagnostic Markers
Computed tomography (CT) or structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may show distinct
patterns of atrophy. In behavioral-variant major or mild frontotemporal NCD, both frontal lobes
(especially the medial frontal lobes) and the anterior temporal lobes are atrophic. In semantic
language–variant major or mild frontotemporal NCD, the middle, inferior, and anterior temporal
lobes are atrophic bilaterally but asymmetrically, with the left side usually being more affected.
Nonfluent language–variant major or mild frontotemporal NCD is associated with predominantly
left posterior frontal-insular atrophy. Functional imaging demonstrates hypoperfusion and/or
cortical hypometabolism in the corresponding brain regions, which may be present in the early
stages in the absence of structural abnormality. Emerging biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease
