Other neurocognitive disorders.
Other neurological conditions.
(e.g., cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-beta and tau levels, and amyloid imaging) may help in the
differential diagnosis, but the distinction from Alzheimer’s disease can remain difficult.
In familial cases of frontotemporal NCD, the identification of genetic mutations may help
confirm the diagnosis. Mutations associated with frontotemporal NCD include the genes
encoding microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) and granulin (GRN), C9ORF72,
transactive response DNA-binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43, or TARDBP), valosin-containing
protein (VCP), chromatin modifying protein 2B (CHMP2B), and fused in sarcoma protein
(FUS).
Functional Consequences of Major or Mild Frontotemporal
Neurocognitive Disorder
Because of the relative early age at onset of the disorder, the disorder often affects workplace and
family life. Because of the involvement of language and/or behavior, function is often more
severely impaired relatively early in the course. For individuals with the behavioral variant, prior
to diagnostic clarification there may be significant family disruption, legal involvement, and
problems in the workplace because of socially inappropriate behaviors. The functional
impairment attributable to behavioral change and language dysfunction, which can include
hyperorality, impulsive wandering, and other disinhibited behaviors, may far exceed that
attributable to the cognitive disturbance and may lead to nursing home placement or
institutionalization. These behaviors can be severely disruptive, even in structured care settings,
particularly when the individuals are otherwise healthy, nonfrail, and free of other medical
comorbidities.
Differential Diagnosis
Other neurodegenerative diseases may be distinguished from
major or mild frontotemporal NCD by their characteristic features. In major or mild NCD due to
Alzheimer’s disease, decline in learning and memory is an early feature. However, 10%–30% of
individuals presenting with a syndrome suggestive of major or mild frontotemporal NCD are
found at autopsy to have Alzheimer’s disease pathology. This occurs more frequently in
individuals who present with progressive dysexecutive syndromes in the absence of behavioral
changes or movement disorder or in those with the logopenic variant.
In major or mild NCD with Lewy bodies, core and suggestive features of Lewy bodies must
be present. In major or mild NCD due to Parkinson’s disease, spontaneous parkinsonism
emerges well before the cognitive decline. In major or mild vascular NCD, depending on
affected brain regions, there may also be loss of executive function and behavioral changes such
as apathy, and this disorder should be considered in the differential diagnosis. However, history
of a cerebrovascular event is temporally related to the onset of cognitive impairment in major or
mild vascular NCD, and neuroimaging reveals infarctions or white matter lesions sufficient to
account for the clinical picture.
699
Major or mild frontotemporal NCD overlaps with progressive
supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, and motor neuron disease clinically as well as
