Other mental disorders and medical conditions.
pathologically. Progressive supranuclear palsy is characterized by supranuclear gaze palsies and
axial-predominant parkinsonism. Pseudobulbar signs may be present, and retropulsion (losing
balance in a backward direction) is often prominent. Neurocognitive assessment shows
psychomotor slowing, poor working memory, and executive dysfunction. Corticobasal
degeneration presents with asymmetric rigidity, limb apraxia, postural instability, myoclonus,
alien limb phenomenon, and cortical sensory loss. Many individuals with behavioral-variant
major or mild frontotemporal NCD show features of motor neuron disease, which tend to be
mixed upper and predominantly lower motor neuron disease.
Behavioral-variant major or mild frontotemporal
NCD may be mistaken for a primary mental disorder, such as major depression, bipolar
disorders, or schizophrenia, and individuals with this variant often present initially to psychiatry.
Over time, the development of progressive neurocognitive difficulties will help to make the
distinction. A careful medical evaluation will help to exclude treatable causes of NCDs, such as
metabolic disturbances, nutritional deficiencies, and infections. If the symptoms characteristic of
a primary mental disorder (e.g., delusions) are judged to be due to the physiological effects of
frontotemporal degeneration, a diagnosis of the appropriate mental disorder due to
frontotemporal degeneration should be given instead of the primary psychotic disorder (e.g.,
psychotic disorder due to frontotemporal degeneration, with delusions).
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder With Lewy Bodies
Diagnostic Criteria
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. The disorder has an insidious onset and gradual progression.
C. The disorder meets a combination of core diagnostic features and suggestive
diagnostic features for either probable or possible neurocognitive disorder with
Lewy bodies.
For probable major or mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies, the
individual has two core features, or one suggestive feature with one or more core
features. For possible major or mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy
bodies, the individual has only one core feature, or one or more suggestive
features.
1. Core diagnostic features:
a. Fluctuating cognition with pronounced variations in attention and
alertness.
b. Recurrent visual hallucinations that are well formed and detailed.
c. Spontaneous features of parkinsonism, with onset subsequent to the
development of cognitive decline.
2. Suggestive diagnostic features:
a. Meets criteria for rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder.
