5
Introduction
The creation of the fifth edition of Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM-5) was a massive undertaking that involved hundreds of people working toward a
common goal over a 12-year period. Much thought and deliberation were involved in evaluating
the diagnostic criteria, considering the organization of every aspect of the manual, and creating
new features believed to be most useful to clinicians, such as dimensional measures that can help
to identify emerging symptoms or determine and monitor changes in severity. All of these efforts
have been directed toward the goal of enhancing the usefulness of DSM-5 as a clinical guide in
the diagnosis of mental disorders, as well as its value for research.
DSM-5 strives to fulfill the need of clinicians, patients, families, and researchers for a clear
and concise description of each mental disorder, which has been operationalized using diagnostic
criteria that are supplemented by dimensional measures of severity and is accompanied by a
digest of information about the diagnosis, including risk factors and culture- and sex- and
gender-related issues.
Clinical training and experience are needed to use DSM for determining a clinical diagnosis.
The diagnostic criteria identify symptoms and signs comprising affects, behaviors, cognitive
functions, and personality traits along with physical signs, symptom combinations (syndromes),
and durations that require clinical expertise to differentiate from normal variation and transient
responses to stress. The diagnostic process can be facilitated by a thorough examination of the
range of symptoms that might be present, such as by conducting a review of mental systems
using the DSM-5 Level 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measure as recommended by The American
Psychiatric Association (APA) Practice Guidelines for the Psychiatric Evaluation of Adults (see
“Cross-Cutting Symptom Measures”).
The use of DSM criteria has the clear virtue of creating a common language for
communication between clinicians about the diagnosis of disorders. Officially recognized
disorders are located in Section II of the manual. However, it should be noted that these
diagnostic criteria and their placement within the classification are based on current research and
may need to be modified as research advances.
Development of DSM-5-TR
Brief History of Prior DSM Editions
The first edition of the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders appeared in 1952. This was the first official manual of mental disorders to
