b. Severe neuroleptic sensitivity.
D. The disturbance is not better explained by cerebrovascular disease, another
neurodegenerative disease, the effects of a substance, or another mental,
neurological, or systemic disorder.
Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
For major neurocognitive disorder with probable or possible Lewy bodies, with
behavioral disturbance, code first G31.83 Lewy body disease, followed by F02.81.
700
For major neurocognitive disorder with probable or possible Lewy bodies, without
behavioral disturbance, code first G31.83 Lewy body disease, followed by F02.80.
Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be coded for
major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
For mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies, code G31.84. (Note: Do not use
the additional code for Lewy body disease. “With behavioral disturbance” and
“without behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but should still be recorded.)
For major or mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies: Use additional code(s)
to indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to Lewy body disease (e.g.,
F06.0 psychotic disorder due to Lewy body disease, with hallucinations; F06.31
depressive disorder due to Lewy body disease, with depressive features).
Diagnostic Features
Major neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies corresponds to the condition known as
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). The overall major or mild neurocognitive disorder with
Lewy bodies (NCDLB) category includes not only progressive cognitive impairment (with early
changes in attention, executive function, and visuoperceptual ability, rather than learning and
memory) but also recurrent, complex, visual hallucinations; and concurrent symptoms of rapid
eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (which can be a very early manifestation); as well
as hallucinations in other sensory modalities, apathy, anxiety, depression, and delusions. The
cognitive symptoms may fluctuate in a pattern that can resemble a delirium, for which an
adequate precipitating factor may or may not be found. The variable presentation of NCDLB
symptoms reduces the likelihood of all symptoms being observed in a brief clinic visit and
necessitates a thorough assessment, including caregiver observations. The use of assessment
scales specifically designed to assess fluctuation may aid in diagnosis. Another core feature is
spontaneous parkinsonism; this can often be relatively mild, and the degree of response to
levodopa therapy is variable. Up to 25% of individuals with probable NCDLB may never
develop extrapyramidal signs, and they are not essential for diagnosis. The parkinsonism must be
distinguished from neuroleptic-induced extrapyramidal signs. Accurate diagnosis is essential to
safe treatment planning, as up to 50% of individuals with NCDLB have severe sensitivity to
neuroleptic drugs, and these medications should be used with extreme caution in individuals
suspected of having an NCDLB diagnosis.
The diagnosis of mild NCDLB is appropriate for individuals who present with the core
