Genetic and physiological.
clinical features at a stage when cognitive or functional impairments are not of sufficient severity
to fulfill criteria for major NCD, particularly if nonamnestic cognitive deficits are prominent.
However, as for all mild NCDs, there will often be insufficient evidence to justify any single
etiology, and use of the unspecified diagnosis may be more appropriate.
Associated Features
Individuals with NCDLB frequently experience repeated falls, syncope, or other transient
episodes of unresponsiveness. Autonomic dysfunction may be observed, including orthostatic
hypotension, constipation, and urinary incontinence; hypersomnia and hyposmia may also be
observed.
Prevalence
Limited data from several high-income and low- and middle-income countries show that the
population-based prevalence estimates for NCDLB range from 0% to 1.2% of the general elderly
population, and from 0% to 9.7% of all dementia cases. The mean prevalence of major NCDLB
was 4.2% of all dementias in the community, and in clinic-based studies this increased to 7.5%
of all dementias. The clinical prevalence of major NCDLB among
701
individuals with dementia does not appear to be significantly affected by either age or sex. In
studies from the United States and United Kingdom, the pathological lesions known as Lewy
bodies are present in 20%–35% of cases of dementia. In a population-based study in Minnesota
that relied on medical records, the incidence of NCDLB was approximately three times higher in
men than in women age 65 or older.
Development and Course
NCDLB is a gradually progressive disorder with insidious onset. However, there is often a
prodromal history of confusional episodes (delirium) of acute onset, which may be precipitated
by illness or surgery. The distinction between NCDLB, in which Lewy bodies are primarily
limbic in location (with or without neocortical involvement), and major or mild NCD due to
Parkinson’s disease, which starts in the brain stem, is the order in which the cognitive and motor
symptoms emerge. In NCDLB, the cognitive decline is manifested early in the course of illness
(see the section “Differential Diagnosis” for this disorder).
Onset of symptoms is typically observed in individuals ages 50–89, with most cases having
onset in individuals in the mid-70s. Disease course may be characterized by occasional plateaus
but eventually progresses through severe dementia to death. Average duration of survival is 5.5–
7.7 years from the onset of cognitive decline.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Familial aggregation may occur, and several risk genes have been
identified; but in most cases of NCDLB, there is no family history. The available studies suggest
that genetic risk factors are as important in NCDLB as in Alzheimer’s disease or Parkinson’s
