Major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to Parkinson’s disease.
disease.
Diagnostic Markers
Biomarkers indicative of NCDLB may be considered to carry diagnostic weight equivalent to
core clinical features; these include low striatal dopamine transporter uptake on single photon
emission computed tomography (SPECT) or positron emission tomography (PET) scan,
abnormal (low uptake) (MIBG) myocardial scintigraphy suggesting cardiac sympathetic
denervation, and polysomnographic confirmation of REM sleep without atonia. The associated
condition REM sleep behavior disorder may be diagnosed through a formal sleep study or
identified by questioning the individual or informant about relevant symptoms. The underlying
neurodegenerative disease is primarily associated with misfolding and aggregation of α-
synuclein, which may be confirmed via postmortem histopathological examination.
Neuropsychological testing beyond the use of a brief screening instrument may be necessary to
define cognitive deficits clearly. Assessment scales developed to measure fluctuation can be
useful.
Biomarkers supportive of NCDLB but with more limited evidence of diagnostic value
include the following: preservation of medial temporal volume relative to Alzheimer’s disease on
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), generalized low uptake on SPECT/PET perfusion scan with
reduced occipital activity with or without the cingulate island sign (sparing of the posterior
cingulate cortex relative to the precuneus plus cuneus on fluorodeoxyglucose-PET imaging), and
prominent slow-wave activity on electroencephalogram with periodic fluctuations in the pre-
alpha/theta range.
Functional Consequences of Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
With Lewy Bodies
Individuals with NCDLB are more functionally impaired than would be expected for their
cognitive deficits when contrasted to individuals with other neurodegenerative diseases,
702
such as Alzheimer’s disease. This is largely a result of motor and autonomic impairments, which
cause problems with toileting, transferring, and eating. Sleep disorders and prominent psychiatric
symptoms may also add to functional difficulties. Consequently, the quality of life of individuals
with NCDLB is often significantly worse than that of individuals with Alzheimer’s disease.
Differential Diagnosis
The distinction between NCDLB
and NCD due to Parkinson’s disease is based on the timing and sequence of motor symptoms
and cognitive symptoms. Consensus criteria for DLB separate NCDLB from NCD due to
Parkinson’s disease by specifying that for dementia to be attributed to Parkinson’s disease, the
Parkinson’s disease diagnosis is present for at least 1 year before cognitive decline has reached
the level of major NCD, whereas for NCDLB, the cognitive symptoms may begin before, with,
or in the absence of parkinsonism. By contrast, expert consensus criteria for Parkinson’s disease
propose that if cognitive decline occurs prior to a motor diagnosis, the diagnosis of Parkinson’s
