disease may still be made; therefore, a clinician may attribute the cognitive decline to the
Parkinson’s disease and diagnose NCD due to Parkinson’s disease. Consequently, the clinician
may choose to diagnose NCD due to Parkinson’s disease or NCDLB for individuals with major
NCD that starts either before or within 12 months of Parkinson’s disease. In such circumstances,
the clinician decides which diagnosis is more appropriate. If Parkinson’s disease has been
diagnosed for at least 1 year prior to the onset of cognitive symptoms, then both expert criteria
agree that NCD due to Parkinson’s disease would typically be the appropriate diagnosis. The
timing and sequence of parkinsonism and mild NCD may be particularly difficult to determine,
and unspecified NCD may need to be diagnosed until the order of clinical progression becomes
evident.
Comorbidity
Lewy body pathology frequently coexists with Alzheimer’s disease, transactive response DNA‐
binding protein 43 (TDP‐43)–related pathology, and cerebrovascular disease pathology,
particularly in the oldest age groups. TDP-43 is a protein that has been identified as a source of
the proteinopathies across a range of neurodegenerative disorders, including amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis and frontotemporal degeneration. The presence of multiple pathological lesions has
implications for disease prognosis and may be associated with a more rapid cognitive decline and
shorter survival time.
Major or Mild Vascular Neurocognitive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. The clinical features are consistent with a vascular etiology, as suggested by
either of the following:
1. Onset of the cognitive deficits is temporally related to one or more
cerebrovascular events.
2. Evidence for decline is prominent in complex attention (including processing
speed) and frontal-executive function.
703
C. There is evidence of the presence of cerebrovascular disease from history,
physical examination, and/or neuroimaging considered sufficient to account for
the neurocognitive deficits.
D. The symptoms are not better explained by another brain disease or systemic
disorder.
Probable vascular neurocognitive disorder is diagnosed if one of the following is
present; otherwise possible vascular neurocognitive disorder should be
diagnosed:
