1. Clinical criteria are supported by neuroimaging evidence of significant
parenchymal injury attributed to cerebrovascular disease (neuroimaging-
supported).
2. The neurocognitive syndrome is temporally related to one or more documented
cerebrovascular events.
3. Both clinical and genetic (e.g., cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with
subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy) evidence of cerebrovascular
disease is present.
Possible vascular neurocognitive disorder is diagnosed if the clinical criteria are
met but neuroimaging is not available and the temporal relationship of the
neurocognitive syndrome with one or more cerebrovascular events is not
established.
Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
For major neurocognitive disorder probably or possibly due to vascular disease, with
behavioral disturbance, code F01.51.
For major neurocognitive disorder probably or possibly due to vascular disease,
without behavioral disturbance, code F01.50.
An additional medical code for the vascular disease is not used.
Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be coded for
major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
For mild vascular neurocognitive disorder, code G31.84. (Note: Do not use an
additional code for the vascular disease. “With behavioral disturbance” and “without
behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but should still be recorded.)
For major or mild vascular neurocognitive disorder: Use additional code(s) to
indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to the cerebrovascular
disease (e.g., F06.31 depressive disorder due to cerebrovascular disease, with
depressive features).
Diagnostic Features
The diagnosis of major or mild vascular neurocognitive disorder (NCD) requires the
establishment of an NCD (Criterion A) and the determination that cerebrovascular disease is the
dominant if not exclusive pathology that accounts for the cognitive deficits (Criteria B and C).
Vascular etiology may range from large vessel stroke to microvascular disease; the presentation
is therefore very heterogeneous, stemming from the types of vascular lesions and their extent and
location. The lesions may be focal, multifocal, or diffuse and occur in various combinations.
Pathogenic mechanisms responsible for brain parenchymal injury include hypoperfusion and
hypoxia, oxidative stress and inflammation leading to endothelial dysfunction, impairment of
autoregulation, and disruption of neurovascular coupling.
Many individuals with major or mild vascular NCD present with multiple infarctions, with an
acute stepwise or fluctuating decline in cognition, and intervening periods of stability and even
some improvement. Others may have gradual onset with slow progression, a rapid development
of deficits followed by relative stability, or another complex presentation. Major or mild vascular
