NCD with a gradual onset and slow progression is generally attributable to small vessel disease
leading to lesions in the white matter, basal ganglia, or thalamus. The gradual progression in
these cases is often punctuated by acute
704
events that leave subtle neurological deficits. The cognitive deficits in these cases can be
attributed to disruption of cortical-subcortical circuits; complex attention, particularly speed of
information processing, and executive function are likely to be affected. Clinical subtypes of
vascular NCD have been described and include 1) poststroke NCD, manifesting immediately
after a stroke; 2) subcortical ischemic vascular NCD; 3) multi-infarct (cortical) NCD; and 4)
cortical-subcortical vascular NCD.
Assessing for the presence of sufficient cerebrovascular disease relies on history, physical
examination, and neuroimaging (Criterion C). Etiological certainty requires the demonstration of
abnormalities on neuroimaging. The lack of neuroimaging can result in significant diagnostic
inaccuracy by overlooking “silent” brain infarction and white matter lesions. However, if the
neurocognitive impairment is temporally associated with one or more well-documented strokes,
a probable diagnosis can be made in the absence of neuroimaging. Clinical evidence of
cerebrovascular disease includes documented history of stroke, with cognitive decline temporally
associated with the event, or physical signs consistent with stroke (e.g., hemiparesis;
pseudobulbar syndrome, visual field defect). Neuroimaging (magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]
or computed tomography [CT]) evidence of cerebrovascular disease comprises one or more of
the following: one or more large vessel infarcts or hemorrhages, a strategically placed single
infarct or hemorrhage (e.g., in angular gyrus, thalamus, basal forebrain), two or more lacunes
outside the brain stem, or extensive and confluent white matter lesions. The latter is often termed
small vessel disease or subcortical ischemic changes on clinical neuroimaging evaluations. MRI
is the preferred mode of neuroimaging, and there has been interest in using specialized MRI
techniques to detect cerebral microbleeds, cortical microinfarcts, dilated perivascular spaces, and
diffusion-based analyses of white matter tracts and network connectivity.
For mild vascular NCD, history of a single stroke or extensive white matter disease is
generally sufficient. For major vascular NCD, two or more strokes, a strategically placed stroke,
or a combination of white matter disease and one or more lacunes is generally necessary.
However, the relationship between identifiable vascular pathology in the brain on neuroimaging
and the cognitive symptoms is imperfect, and clinical judgment is generally needed to relate the
vascular lesions to the cognitive syndrome.
The neurocognitive symptoms must not be better explained by another medical condition or
mental disorder. For example, prominent memory deficit early in the course might suggest NCD
due to Alzheimer’s disease, early and prominent parkinsonian features would suggest NCD due
to Parkinson’s disease, and a close association between onset of cognitive and depressive
symptoms would suggest cognitive impairment as a result of depression.
A number of expert international groups have similarly defined and categorized the vascular
NCDs, with which DSM-5 criteria generally display good correspondence.
Associated Features
