Environmental.
A neurological assessment often reveals history of stroke or transient ischemic episodes, and
signs indicative of brain infarctions. Also commonly associated are personality and mood
changes, abulia, depression, and emotional lability. The development of late-onset depressive
symptoms accompanied by psychomotor slowing and executive dysfunction is a common
presentation among older adults with progressive small vessel ischemic disease (so-called
vascular depression).
Prevalence
Vascular disease is the second most common cause of NCD after Alzheimer’s disease. In the
United States, population prevalence estimates for vascular dementia are 0.98% for individuals
ages 71–79 years, 4.09% for those ages 80–89 years, and 6.19% for those age 90 years or older.
Within 3 months following stroke, 20%–30% of individuals are diagnosed with
705
dementia. In a European autopsy series of decedents ages 60–103 years, the prevalence of pure
vascular dementia was 12.3%. Among those ages 60–69 years, the prevalence was higher
(15.0%) compared with those older than 90 years (8.7%). Mixed dementia (Alzheimer’s plus
vascular pathology) was present in 5.5% of the overall cohort, with a higher prevalence in those
older than 90 years (10.6%) compared with those ages 60–69 years (5.2%). Higher prevalence of
vascular dementia has been found among African Americans, Mexican Americans, and South
Asian Americans compared with non-Latinx Whites, possibly because of higher rates of risk
factors such as diabetes and cardiovascular disease. In Japan and several other Asian countries,
the prevalence of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease has increased over time relative to
vascular dementia. Currently, the prevalence of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease among
Japanese Americans is 2.6 times higher than that of vascular dementia.
Stroke is more common in men through age 65 years, but more common in women after age
65 years. Overall, the rate of vascular NCD was higher in men in some studies.
Development and Course
Major or mild vascular NCD can occur at any age, although the prevalence increases
exponentially after age 65 years. In older individuals, additional pathologies are almost always
present and partly account for the neurocognitive deficits. The course may vary from acute onset
with partial improvement to stepwise decline to progressive decline, with fluctuations and
plateaus of varying durations. Pure subcortical major or mild vascular NCD can have a slowly
progressive course that simulates major or mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease. The risk of an
ischemic stroke progressing to vascular NCD within 5 years was almost twice as high among
African Americans as among non-Latinx Whites in the United States and occurred at younger
ages. This is possibly a result of the impact of higher rates of hypertension, diabetes, and adverse
social determinants of mental health known to worsen dementia risk, such as limited formal
education and low socioeconomic status.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
The neurocognitive outcomes of vascular brain injury are influenced by
