Genetic and physiological.
Other neurocognitive disorders.
Other medical conditions.
Other mental disorders.
neuroplasticity factors such as education, physical exercise, and mental activity.
The major risk factors for major or mild vascular NCD are the same as
those for cerebrovascular disease and stroke, including hypertension, diabetes, smoking, obesity,
high cholesterol levels, high homocysteine levels, other risk factors for atherosclerosis and
arteriolosclerosis, atrial fibrillation, and other conditions increasing the risk of cerebral emboli.
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy, leading to cerebral hemorrhage, is an important risk factor in
which amyloid deposits occur within arterial vessels. A genetic risk factor is the hereditary
condition 
cerebral 
autosomal 
dominant 
arteriopathy 
with 
subcortical 
infarcts 
and
leukoencephalopathy, or CADASIL. Other rarer forms of genetic disorders linked to vascular
NCD exist, but overall the contribution of genetics is small.
Diagnostic Markers
Structural neuroimaging, using MRI or CT, has an important role in the diagnostic process.
There are no other established biomarkers of major or mild vascular NCD.
Functional Consequences of Major or Mild Vascular Neurocognitive
Disorder
Major or mild vascular NCD is commonly associated with physical deficits that cause additional
disability.
706
Differential Diagnosis
Since incidental brain infarctions and white matter lesions are
common in older individuals, it is important to consider other possible etiologies when an NCD
is present in an individual with white matter lesions. A history of memory deficit early in the
course, and progressive worsening of memory, language, executive function, and perceptual-
motor abilities in the absence of corresponding focal lesions on brain imaging, are suggestive of
Alzheimer’s disease as the primary diagnosis. Potential biomarkers currently being validated for
Alzheimer’s disease, such as cerebrospinal fluid levels of β-amyloid and phosphorylated tau, and
amyloid and tau imaging, may prove to be helpful in the differential diagnosis. NCD with Lewy
bodies is distinguished from major or mild vascular NCD by its core features of fluctuating
cognition, visual hallucinations, and spontaneous parkinsonism. While deficits in executive
function and language occur in major or mild vascular NCD, the insidious onset and gradual
progression of behavioral features or language impairment are characteristic of frontotemporal
NCD and are not typical of vascular etiology.
A diagnosis of major or mild vascular NCD is not made if other
diseases (e.g., brain tumor, multiple sclerosis, encephalitis, toxic or metabolic disorders) are
present and are of sufficient severity to account for the cognitive impairment.
A diagnosis of major or mild vascular NCD is inappropriate if the
symptoms can be entirely attributed to delirium, although delirium may sometimes be
superimposed on a preexisting major or mild vascular NCD, in which case both diagnoses can be
made. If the criteria for major depressive disorder are met and the cognitive impairment is
