disturbance: code first S06.2X9S diffuse traumatic brain injury with loss of
consciousness of unspecified duration, sequela; followed by F02.80 major
neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury, without behavioral disturbance.
Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be coded for
major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
For mild neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury, code G31.84. (Note:
Do not use the additional code for traumatic brain injury. “With behavioral
disturbance” and “without behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but should still
be recorded.)
For major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury: Use
additional code(s) to indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to the
traumatic brain injury (e.g., F06.34 bipolar and related disorder due to traumatic
brain injury, with mixed features; F07.0 personality change due to traumatic brain
injury, apathetic type).
Specifiers
Rate the severity of the neurocognitive disorder (NCD), not the underlying traumatic brain injury
(see the section “Development and Course” for this disorder).
Diagnostic Features
Major or mild NCD due to traumatic brain injury (TBI) denotes an acquired and persistent
disorder of cognition resulting from a traumatic brain injury. Traumatic brain injury is defined as
disruption of brain structure and/or function resulting from the application of biomechanical
forces (including acceleration/deceleration forces and blast-related forces), as manifested
immediately by one or more of the following clinical signs: loss of consciousness, loss of
memory for events immediately before or after the injury (posttraumatic amnesia), alteration in
mental state (e.g., confusion, disorientation, slowed thinking), or focal neurological signs (e.g.,
hemiparesis, hemisensory loss, cortical blindness, aphasia, apraxia, weakness, loss of balance,
other sensory loss that cannot be accounted for by peripheral or other causes) (Criterion B).
These manifestations of TBI must not be due to alcohol or other drugs or medications, other
injuries or treatment(s) for other injuries (e.g., facial injuries, intubation, or bodily/systemic
injuries), or psychological trauma, language barrier, or coexisting medical conditions.
The severity of a TBI is classified as mild, complicated mild, moderate, or severe according
to the thresholds in Table 2. An individual whose injury phenomenologically meets criteria for
mild TBI but whose computed tomographic or magnetic resonance imaging in the acute period
after TBI reveals traumatic intracranial abnormalities (i.e., traumatic epidural or subdural
hematoma, subarachnoid or intracerebral hemorrhage, cerebral contusions or laceration) is
classified as complicated mild TBI. Outcomes of individuals with complicated mild TBI are
more like those with moderate TBI than those with uncomplicated mild TBI.
708
TABLE 2 Classification of traumatic brain injury (TBI) severity
