contain a glossary of descriptions of the diagnostic categories. The use of the term “reaction”
throughout the classification reflected the influence of Adolf Meyer’s psychobiological view that
mental disorders represented reactions of the personality to psychological, social, and biological
factors. In the development of the second edition (DSM-II), a decision was made to base the
classification on the mental disorders section of
6
the eighth revision of the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-8), for which
representatives of the APA had provided consultation. Both DSM-II and ICD-8 went into effect
in 1968.
As had been the case for DSM-I and DSM-II, the development of DSM-III was coordinated
with the development of the International Classification of Diseases, specifically ICD-9, which
was published in 1975 and implemented in 1978. Work began on DSM-III in 1974, with
publication in 1980. DSM-III, under the direction of Robert L. Spitzer, M.D., introduced a
number of important methodological innovations, including explicit diagnostic criteria and a
descriptive approach that attempted to be neutral with respect to theories of etiology of mental
disorders. Experience with DSM-III revealed a number of inconsistencies in the system.
Therefore, the APA appointed a Workgroup to Revise DSM-III, which developed the revisions
and corrections that led to DSM-III-R in 1987.
DSM-IV was published in 1994. It was the culmination of a 6-year effort that involved more
than 1,000 individuals and numerous professional organizations. Much of the effort involved
conducting a comprehensive review of the literature to establish a firm empirical basis for
making modifications. Developers of DSM-IV and the tenth revision of the ICD worked closely
to coordinate their efforts, resulting in increased congruence between the two systems. ICD-10
was published in 1992.
A thorough history of all DSM editions is located on the APA website:
https://www.psychiatry.org/psychiatrists/practice/dsm/history-of-the-dsm.
DSM-5 Revision Process
In 1999, the APA launched an evaluation of the strengths and weaknesses of DSM. This effort
was coordinated with the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Division of Mental Health, the
World Psychiatric Association, and the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) in the form
of several conferences, the proceedings of which were published in the 2002 monograph A
Research Agenda for DSM-V. Thereafter, from 2003 to 2008, a cooperative agreement between
the APA and WHO, supported by the NIMH, the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), and
the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA), led to the convening of 13
international DSM-5 research planning conferences, involving 400 participants from 39
countries, to review the world literature in specific diagnostic areas to prepare for revisions in
developing both DSM-5 and the International Classification of Diseases, 11th Revision (ICD-
11). Reports from these conferences formed the basis for future DSM-5 Task Force reviews and
set the stage for the new edition of DSM.
In 2006, the APA named David J. Kupfer, M.D., as Chair and Darrel A. Regier, M.D.,
M.P.H., as Vice-Chair of the DSM-5 Task Force. They were charged with recommending chairs
