men and women approach parity. The leading causes of TBI in the United States are falls (178.4
per 100,000), collision with a moving or stationary object (termed “struck by/against” events)
(92.7 per 100,000), motor vehicle crashes (74.7 per 100,000), and assaults (50.6 per 100,000
persons). Concussion in sport is increasingly recognized as a cause of mild TBI.
Men are approximately 40% more likely to experience a TBI compared with women in the
young and adult populations; however, women may have higher risk of TBI after age 65 years. It
has been suggested that men with moderate or severe TBI may have a worse prognosis than
women with the same level of severity; however, the findings have been mixed. The cause of
TBI also differs by sex and gender. Men are more likely to experience injuries at work, in motor
vehicle accidents, and during military activities, whereas women are more likely to experience
injuries from assault and domestic violence.
Development and Course
The course of recovery from TBI is variable, depending not only on the specifics of the injury
but also on pre-injury and postinjury factors. These factors may favor or impede recovery and
include age; prior history of TBI; neurological, psychiatric, and substance use comorbidities and
complications; genetics; the timeliness and effectiveness of medical and rehabilitative
interventions; and psychosocial support, among others.
Neurocognitive impairments are most severe in the acute period following the TBI and may
be accompanied by disturbances of emotion and behavior. Across the spectrum of TBI severity,
substantial improvement in neurocognitive and associated psychiatric and neurological
symptoms and signs is expected. The extent of recovery and the variability in neurocognitive
outcomes tend to reflect the severity of TBI, with complete recovery being typical after mild TBI
and more variable, and often incomplete, recovery following more severe TBI.
Neurocognitive impairments associated with mild TBI typically resolve within days to weeks
after the injury, with complete resolution within 3–12 months post-injury. Other symptoms (e.g.,
depression, irritability, fatigue, headache, photosensitivity, sleep disturbance) that may
potentially co-occur with the neurocognitive symptoms also tend to resolve in the weeks
following mild TBI. Persistent symptoms after mild TBI or subsequent neurocognitive
deterioration should trigger consideration of other potential causes of neurocognitive symptoms
and functional limitations, including major depressive disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD), anxiety disorders, substance use disorders, sleep disturbances, negative injury
perceptions, and poor expectations for recovery. When neurocognitive symptoms and functional
limitations persist after mild TBI (including repetitive mild TBI) despite treatment of their other
potential causes, diagnosis of an NCD due to TBI may be appropriate.
Neurocognitive impairments and associated functional limitations produced by moderate and
severe TBI typically improve over weeks to months after the injury, although long-term
neurocognitive recovery is often incomplete among individuals with more severe injuries.
Nonetheless, neurocognitive and functional improvement may continue for years after moderate
or severe TBI, with more individuals cognitively improving than declining during the first 5
years postinjury. With moderate and severe TBI, in addition to persistence of neurocognitive
deficits, there may be associated neurological, medical, emotional, and behavioral complications.
These include seizures (particularly in the first year), photosensitivity, hyperacusis, irritability,
aggression, depression, sleep disturbance, fatigue, apathy, inability to resume occupational and
