social functioning at preinjury level, and deterioration in interpersonal relationships. Moderate
and severe TBI have been
710
associated with increased risk of depression, aggression, and possibly neurodegenerative
diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease, Lewy body disease, and frontotemporal degeneration.
The features of persisting major or mild NCD due to TBI will vary by age, specifics of the
injury, and cofactors. Persisting TBI-related impairment in an infant or child may be reflected in
delays in reaching developmental milestones (e.g., language acquisition), worse academic
performance, and possibly impaired social development. Among older teenagers and adults,
persisting symptoms may include various neurocognitive deficits, irritability, hypersensitivity to
light and sound, easy fatigability, and mood changes, including depression, anxiety, hostility, or
apathy. In older individuals, mild TBI may produce neurocognitive outcomes like those
associated with moderate or severe TBI in younger adults.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Risk factors for adverse cognitive outcomes after TBI include age older than 40 years, lower pre-
injury cognitive abilities (especially as indexed by education or academic competence), preinjury
depressive symptoms, possibly pre-injury unemployment, and injury severity. Other risk factors
for adverse cognitive outcomes include a longer duration of posttraumatic amnesia, evidence of
traumatic intracranial abnormalities on early computed tomography or magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) studies (i.e., traumatic epidural or subdural hematoma, subarachnoid or
intracerebral hemorrhage, cerebral contusions or laceration, diffuse axonal injury) and
neurogenetic profile (e.g., APOE*E4 allele carrier status, catechol-O-methyltransferase
genotype, ANKK1 Taq1A allele status). Pre-injury alcohol or substance use disorders increase
the risk of sustaining a TBI as well as the risk of adverse cognitive outcomes, including memory
impairment and executive dysfunction.
Diagnostic Markers
The diagnosis of major or mild NCD due to TBI may be supported by contemporaneous
computed tomographic or MRI findings (e.g., focal atrophy, encephalomalacia, gliosis, white
matter abormalities) in brain areas or networks subserving specific cognitive domains in which
an individual demonstrates impairment. The diagnosis may also be supported by subtle
neurological signs (e.g., multiple primitive reflexes such as glabellar sign, snout response,
palmomental reflex) or deficits in saccades and smooth-pursuit eye movements co-occurring
with frontally mediated cognitive impairments such as complex attention problems, slow
processing speed, impaired memory retrieval, or executive dysfunction. Particularly in some
cases of penetrating TBI, the diagnosis of NCD due to TBI may be supported by posttraumatic
epilepsy with focal onset in a location that corresponds to the anatomy of a cognitive domain in
which an individual demonstrates impairment (e.g., medial temporal lobe–onset seizures and
episodic memory impairment; frontal lobe seizures and executive dysfunction or social cognitive
impairment).
Performance on commonly used general cognitive screening measures, particularly when
