interpreted using large-scale, population-based normative data, may usefully identify individuals
in need of further neurodiagnostic assessment. However, the diagnosis of major or mild NCD
due to TBI rests on performance on domain-specific cognitive assessment interpreted in light of
the individual’s prior performance (e.g., neuropsychological estimates of pre-injury cognitive
ability or appropriate norms) and assessment of functional status.
While neuroimaging and other clinical assessments (e.g., subtle neurological signs) may
provide supportive information, they cannot independently diagnose NCD due to TBI. At
present, there are no other established biomarkers of major or mild NCD due to TBI.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Individuals with TBI, including moderate or severe TBI, are at increased long-term risk for
suicide. While depression is a substantial contributor to this risk, it does not fully account for it.
Rates of suicidal ideation are as high as 10%, and rates of suicide attempt are 0.8%–1.7%
711
over the first 20 years after TBI. The development of depression and/or suicidal behavior at 1-
year post-injury is associated with consistently elevated rates of depression and suicidal behavior
5 years after TBI. While the relationship between cognitive impairments and suicide risk after
TBI is complex, assessing suicide risk is an important element in the evaluation of individuals
with major or mild NCD due to TBI.
Youth who have had concussions may be at higher risk for suicidal behavior. There is an
increased risk of suicide among both veteran and civilian cohorts with TBI, and individuals
seeking mental health care may have a history of TBI. Individuals seeking rehabilitative services
for TBI are also at heightened risk for suicidal thoughts and behavior.
Functional Consequences of Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
Due to Traumatic Brain Injury
Approximately 3.17 million individuals in the United States (approximately 1.1% of the
population) live with a TBI-related disability, including neurocognitive impairments that
compromise the ability to work or perform daily activities and that are associated with the need
for ongoing medical care, rehabilitation, support, and services. Cognitive impairments interfere
with functional independence, productive employment, and community participation and may
reduce satisfaction with life. The influence of cognitive impairments on functional status varies
with the type and severity of those impairments; with the presence and severity of co-occurring
psychiatric, substance use, neurological, and medical conditions; and with family, other
psychosocial, and medical support.
With mild NCD due to TBI, individuals may report reduced cognitive efficiency, difficulty
concentrating, and lessened ability to perform usual activities. With major NCD due to TBI, an
individual may have difficulty in independent living and self-care. Prominent neuromotor
features, such as severe incoordination, ataxia, and motor slowing, may be present in major NCD
due to TBI and may add to functional difficulties.
Individuals with TBI histories report more depressive and anxious symptoms, and these can
amplify cognitive complaints and worsen functional outcome. Additionally, loss of emotional
