Other mental disorders and medical conditions.
Factitious disorder and malingering.
control, including aggressive or inappropriate affect and apathy, may be present after more
severe TBI with greater neurocognitive impairment. These features may compound difficulties
with functional independence and self-care.
Differential Diagnosis
Mental disorders (e.g., major depressive disorder,
anxiety disorders, PTSD, alcohol and other substance use disorders, sleep disturbances),
prescribed medications (e.g., typical antipsychotics, benzodiazepines, drugs with anticholinergic
properties, antiepileptic drugs), and other medical conditions may contribute to or account for
cognitive impairments among individuals with TBI, and need to be considered in the differential
diagnosis of major or mild NCD due to TBI.
Alternative explanations for neurocognitive symptoms should
be considered when the severity of neurocognitive symptoms and functional limitations are
inconsistent with the cognitive outcomes expected after TBI—and particularly mild TBI—and
when neuropsychological assessment reveals poor effort or is otherwise not valid for
interpretation. In such circumstances, the possibility of factitious disorder or malingering
(especially in situations in which there might be external incentives such as obtaining financial
compensation) should be considered.
Comorbidity
Major or mild NCD due to TBI may be accompanied by other specified or unspecified
depressive or anxiety disorders characterized by disturbances in emotional function (e.g.,
irritability, easy frustration, tension and anxiety, affective lability). Other specified or
712
unspecified personality disorders may also occur as a result of symptoms such as disinhibition,
apathy, suspiciousness, or aggression. Medical comorbidities may occur with neurological and
physical disturbances characterized by headache, fatigue, sleep disorders, vertigo or dizziness,
tinnitus or hyperacusis, photosensitivity, anosmia, reduced tolerance to psychotropic
medications, and, particularly in more severe TBI, neurological symptoms and signs (e.g.,
seizures, hemiparesis, visual disturbances, cranial nerve deficits) and evidence of orthopedic
injuries. The most common medical and psychiatric comorbidities associated with moderate-to-
severe TBI are (in order of frequency) back pain, depression, hypertension, anxiety, fractures,
high blood cholesterol, sleep disorders, panic attacks, osteoarthritis, and diabetes.
Among individuals with substance use disorders, the neurocognitive effects of the substance
contribute to or compound the TBI-associated cognitive disturbances, particularly among
individuals with two or more TBIs.
PTSD can co-occur with TBI in civilian, military, and veterans populations. TBI and PTSD
produce similar neurocognitive symptoms (e.g., disturbances of complex attention, processing
speed, learning and memory, and executive function), and either or both conditions, as well as
co-occurring depression and sleep disturbances, may explain neurocognitive symptoms in
individuals with such comorbidities.
