Substance/Medication-Induced Major or Mild
Neurocognitive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. The neurocognitive impairments do not occur exclusively during the course of a
delirium and persist beyond the usual duration of intoxication and acute
withdrawal.
C. The involved substance or medication and duration and extent of use are
capable of producing the neurocognitive impairment.
D. The temporal course of the neurocognitive deficits is consistent with the timing of
substance or medication use and abstinence (e.g., the deficits remain stable or
improve after a period of abstinence).
E. The neurocognitive disorder is not attributable to another medical condition or is
not better explained by another mental disorder.
Coding note (see also coding table on pp. 682–683): The ICD-10-CM codes for
the [specific substance/medication]-induced neurocognitive disorders are indicated
in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-CM code depends on whether or not there
is a comorbid substance use disorder present for the same class of substance. In
any case, an additional separate diagnosis of a substance use disorder is not given.
Substance-induced major neurocognitive disorder: If a mild substance use
disorder is comorbid with the substance-induced major neurocognitive disorder, the
4th position character is “1,” and the clinician should record “mild [substance] use
disorder” before the substance-induced major neurocognitive disorder (e.g., “mild
inhalant use disorder with inhalant-induced major neurocognitive disorder”). For
alcohol and sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic substances, a mild substance use
disorder is insufficient to cause a substance-induced major neurocognitive disorder;
thus, there are no available ICD-10-CM codes for this combination. If a moderate or
severe substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance-induced major
neurocognitive disorder, the 4th position character is “2,” and the clinician should
record “moderate [substance] use disorder” or “severe [substance] use disorder,”
depending on the severity of the comorbid substance use disorder. If there is no
comorbid substance use disorder, then the 4th position character is “9,” and the
clinician should record only the substance-induced major neurocognitive disorder.
713
Substance-induced mild neurocognitive disorder: If a mild substance use
disorder is comorbid with the substance-induced mild neurocognitive disorder, the
4th position character is “1,” and the clinician should record “mild [substance] use
disorder” before the substance-induced mild neurocognitive disorder (e.g., “mild
