mild neurocognitive disorder). In cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor
but the specific substance is unknown, the ICD-10-CM code for the other (or unknown)
substance class is used, and the fact that the substance is unknown is recorded (e.g., F19.97
unknown substance-induced major neurocognitive disorder).
When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is
listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the disorder (i.e., [specific
substance]–induced major neurocognitive disorder or [specific substance]–induced mild
neurocognitive disorder), followed by the type in the case of alcohol (i.e., nonamnestic-
confabulatory type, amnestic-confabulatory type), followed by specification of duration (i.e.,
persistent). For example, in the case of persistent amnestic-confabulatory symptoms in a man
with a severe alcohol use disorder, the diagnosis is F10.26 severe alcohol use disorder with
alcohol-induced major neurocognitive disorder, amnestic-confabulatory type, persistent. A
separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe alcohol use disorder is not given. If the substance-
induced neurocognitive disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a
sporadic heavy use of inhalants), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F18.988
[specific inhalant]–induced mild neurocognitive disorder).
Diagnostic Features
Substance/medication-induced major or mild NCD is characterized by neurocognitive
impairments that persist beyond the usual duration of intoxication and acute withdrawal
(Criterion B). Initially, these manifestations can reflect slow recovery of brain functions from a
period of prolonged substance use, and improvements in neurocognitive as well as brain imaging
indicators may be seen over many months. If the disorder continues for an extended period,
persistent should be specified. The given substance and its use must be known to be capable of
causing the observed impairments (Criterion C). While nonspecific decrements in a range of
cognitive abilities can occur with nearly any substance of abuse and a variety of medications,
some patterns occur more frequently with selected drug classes. For example, NCD due to
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic drugs (e.g., benzodiazepines, barbiturates) may show greater
disturbances in memory than in other cognitive functions. NCD induced by alcohol frequently
manifests with a combination of impairments in executive-function and memory and learning
domains. The temporal course of the substance-induced NCD must be consistent with that of use
of the given substance (Criterion D). Alcohol-induced, amnestic-confabulatory type
(Korsakoff’s) NCD is characterized by an impairment in recent memory that is out of proportion
to additional NCD symptoms. Features include prominent amnesia (severe difficulty learning
new information with rapid forgetting) and a tendency to confabulate, although confabulation
can be seen with any severe diminution of recent memory. These manifestations may co-occur
with signs of thiamine encephalopathy (Wernicke’s encephalopathy) with associated features
such as nystagmus and ataxia. Ophthalmoplegia of Wernicke’s encephalopathy is typically
characterized by a lateral gaze paralysis. The neurocognitive deficits associated with inhalant
misuse include diminished executive functioning, slower cognitive speed, and additional
impaired performance on aspects of the Wisconsin Card Sorting and the Stroop tests.
Neurocognitive symptoms associated with stimulant use include difficulties with learning and
memory and executive function. Methamphetamine use can also be associated with
