715
evidence of vascular injury (e.g., focal weakness, unilateral incoordination, asymmetrical
reflexes). The most common neurocognitive profile approximates that seen in vascular NCD.
Substances that cause NCD included in the other (or unknown) substance category include
intrathecal methotrexate and organophosphate insecticides, as well as compounds that are
misused and known to induce adverse cognitive effects but are less well characterized (e.g.,
kratom/Mitragyna speciosa).
When one is determining the relationship between NCD conditions and any group of drugs, it
is important to consider whether the deficit was present before the use of the substance and
consequently would not be attributable to the substance—and may have even contributed to poor
judgment that resulted in the substance use. For example, evidence of decreased impulse control
and related impairment of executive functions have been reported as associated with the onset of
the use of stimulants and other drugs. In studies in which neurocognitive function is carefully
assessed prior to substance use, and then subjects are followed up over several months or more,
the ability of drugs other than alcohol, other depressants, and inhalants to cause clinically
significant persistent NCDs is not clear.
Associated Features
Inhalant-induced NCD conditions may be associated with the smell of the inhalant on an
individual’s breath or a rash around the individual’s nose or mouth from “huffing” the drug from
a container. These are most often seen in individuals with limited access to other drugs who have
histories of inhalant use as well as the early onset of use of multiple substances, especially if
their symptoms fulfill criteria for conduct or antisocial personality disorders. A high risk is also
seen in workers exposed to solvents in the workplace. Mild NCD induced by drugs with central
nervous system depressant effects may manifest with added symptoms of increased irritability,
anxiety, sleep disturbance, and dysphoria. NCD induced by stimulant drugs may manifest with
rebound depression, hypersomnia, and apathy. In severe forms of substance/medication-induced
major NCD (e.g., associated with long-term alcohol use), there may be prominent neuromotor
features, such as incoordination, ataxia related to cerebellar damage, and motor slowing, as well
as medical complications such as hypokalemia and cardiac arrhythmias. There may also be loss
of emotional control, including aggressive or inappropriate affect, or apathy.
Prevalence
The prevalence of these conditions is not well known. Prevalence figures are more available for
the use of these substances and for associated substance use disorders rather than for the
neurocognitive conditions. Substance/medication-induced major or mild NCDs are more likely
in those who are older, have longer duration of use, and have other risk factors such as
nutritional deficits.
For alcohol use disorder, the rate of mild NCD is approximately 30%–40% in the first 2
months of abstinence. Mild NCD may persist, particularly in those who do not achieve stable
abstinence until after age 50 years. Major NCD is rare and may result from concomitant
nutritional deficits, as in alcohol-induced amnestic-confabulatory NCD. Alcohol-induced major
NCD may be more common in men.
