Few studies are available regarding the prevalence of NCD from other brain depressant drugs
(i.e., sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics), likely reflecting the relative rarity of studies of
substance use disorders on these drugs and the relatively low level of heavy and persistent
“recreational” use of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic drugs compared with alcohol, cannabis,
and many other drugs.
More data are available on the prevalence of inhalant use. Such exposure has been linked to
both major and mild NCD of varied duration in both higher- and lower-income populations.
However, persistent use to the point of developing an NCD is estimated to be less than 1% of the
U.S. population.
716
In the case of stimulants (methamphetamines and cocaine), cerebrovascular disease can also
occur, resulting in diffuse or focal brain injury that can be of mild or major neurocognitive
levels.
Development and Course
The onset of substance use disorders tends to occur during late adolescence and peak in the 20s
and 30s. Although longer history of severe substance use disorder is associated with greater
likelihood of NCD, the relationships are not straightforward, with substantial and even complete
recovery of neurocognitive functions being common among persons who achieve stable
abstinence prior to age 50 years. Substance/medication-induced major or mild NCD is most
likely to become persistent in individuals who continue to have substance use disorders past the
age of 50 years, presumably because of a combination of lessened neural plasticity and the onset
of other age-related brain changes.
NCD conditions may involve a fairly rapid onset of neurocognitive impairment in individuals
whose history includes the use of multiple types of drugs of abuse, especially with an early onset
of substance use. Earlier commencement of heavy use, particularly of alcohol, may lead to
defects in later neural development (e.g., later stages of maturation of frontal circuitries), which
may have effects on social cognition as well as other neurocognitive abilities. For alcohol-
induced NCD, there may be an additive effect of aging and alcohol-induced brain injury.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Risk factors for substance/medication-induced NCDs include older age, longer duration of use,
and persistent use past age 50 years.
For alcohol-induced NCD, long-term nutritional deficiencies, liver disease, vascular risk
factors, and cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease may contribute to risk. An increased risk
for alcohol-induced, amnestic confabulatory–type NCD occurs in the context of a genetic
transketolase deficiency as well as in the context of poor nutrition.
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced NCDs have not been well studied, but these
problems may be increased in individuals with long-term anxiety disorders or sleep impairment
who have been taking benzodiazepines or other hypnotic medications in increasing amounts for
months or years.
