for the 13 diagnostic work groups and additional task force members with a multidisciplinary
range of expertise who would oversee the development of DSM-5. An additional vetting process
was initiated by the APA Board of Trustees to disclose sources of income and thus avoid
conflicts of interest by task force and work group members. The full disclosure of all income and
research grants from commercial sources, including the pharmaceutical industry, in the previous
3 years, the imposition of an income cap from all commercial sources, and the publication of
disclosures on a website set a new standard for the field. Thereafter, the task force of 28
members was approved in 2007, and appointments of more than 130 work group members were
approved in 2008. More than 400 additional work group advisors with no voting authority were
also approved to participate in the process. A clear concept of the next evolutionary stage for the
classification of mental disorders was central to the efforts of the task force and the work groups.
This vision emerged as the task force and work groups recounted the history of DSM-IV’s
classification, its current strengths and limitations, and strategic directions for its revision.
7
An intensive 6-year process involved conducting literature reviews and secondary analyses,
publishing research reports in scientific journals, developing draft diagnostic criteria, posting
preliminary drafts on the DSM-5 website for public comment, presenting preliminary findings at
professional meetings, performing field trials, and revising criteria and text. Overall, many health
professional and educational groups were involved in this development and testing of DSM-5,
including physicians, psychologists, social workers, nurses, counselors, epidemiologists,
statisticians, neuroscientists, and neuropsychologists. Also, individuals with mental disorders and
families of individuals with mental disorders, lawyers, consumer organizations, and advocacy
groups participated in revising DSM-5 by providing feedback on the mental disorders described
in this volume.
Proposals for Revisions
Proposals for the revision of DSM-IV diagnostic criteria were developed by members of the
work groups on the basis of rationale, scope of change, expected impact on clinical management
and public health, strength of the supporting research evidence, overall clarity, and clinical
utility. Proposals encompassed changes to diagnostic criteria; the addition of new disorders,
subtypes, and specifiers; and the deletion of existing disorders.
In the proposals for revisions, strengths and weaknesses in the current criteria and nosology
were first identified. Novel scientific findings over the previous two decades were considered,
leading to the creation of a research plan to assess potential changes through literature reviews
and secondary data analyses. Four principles guided the draft revisions: 1) DSM-5 is primarily
intended to be a manual to be used by clinicians, and revisions must be feasible for routine
clinical practice; 2) recommendations for revisions should be guided by research evidence; 3)
where possible, continuity should be maintained with previous editions of DSM; and 4) no a
priori constraints should be placed on the degree of change between DSM-IV and DSM-5.
Building on the initial literature reviews, work groups identified key issues within their
diagnostic areas. Work groups also examined broader methodological concerns, such as the
presence of contradictory findings within the literature; development of a refined definition of
