Diagnostic Markers
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of individuals with chronic alcohol use disorder frequently
reveals cortical thinning, white matter loss, and enlargement of sulci and ventricles. While
neuroimaging abnormalities are more common in those with NCDs, it is possible to observe
NCDs without neuroimaging abnormalities, and vice versa. Specialized techniques (e.g.,
diffusion tensor imaging) may reveal damage to specific white matter tracts. Magnetic resonance
spectroscopy may reveal reduction in N-acetylaspartate, and increase in markers of inflammation
(e.g., myoinositol) or white matter injury (e.g., choline). Many of these brain imaging changes
and neurocognitive manifestations reverse following successful abstinence. In individuals with
methamphetamine use disorder, MRI may also reveal hyperintensities suggestive of
microhemorrhages or larger areas of infarction.
Functional Consequences of Substance/Medication-Induced Major or
Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
The functional consequences of substance/medication-induced mild NCD are sometimes
augmented by reduced cognitive efficiency and difficulty concentrating beyond that seen in
many other NCDs. In addition, at both major and mild levels, substance/medication-induced
NCDs may have associated motor syndromes that increase the level of functional impairment.
717
Differential Diagnosis
Individuals with substance use disorders, substance intoxication, and substance withdrawal are at
increased risk for other conditions that may independently, or through a compounding effect,
result in neurocognitive disturbance. These include history of traumatic brain injury and
infections that can accompany substance use disorder (e.g., HIV, hepatitis C virus, syphilis).
Therefore, presence of substance/medication-induced major or mild NCD should be
differentiated from NCDs arising outside the context of substance use, intoxication, and
withdrawal, including these accompanying conditions (e.g., traumatic brain injury).
Comorbidity
Substance use disorders, substance intoxication, and substance withdrawal are highly comorbid
with other mental disorders. In general, the higher the exposure to drugs of abuse, the greater the
risk for a substance- or medication-induced NCD. Comorbid posttraumatic stress disorder,
psychotic disorders, depressive and bipolar disorders, and neurodevelopmental disorders can
contribute to neurocognitive impairment in substance users. Traumatic brain injury occurs more
frequently with substance use, complicating efforts to determine the etiology of NCD in such
cases. Severe, long-term alcohol use disorder can be associated with major organ system disease,
including cerebrovascular disease and cirrhosis; inhalant use disorder is associated with higher
rates of kidney and liver damage; and amphetamine- and cocaine-induced NCD may be
accompanied by major or mild vascular NCD secondary to stimulant use.
