Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to HIV
Infection
Diagnostic Criteria
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. There is documented infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
C. The neurocognitive disorder is not better explained by non-HIV conditions,
including 
secondary 
brain 
diseases 
such 
as 
progressive 
multifocal
leukoencephalopathy or cryptococcal meningitis.
D. The neurocognitive disorder is not attributable to another medical condition and
is not better explained by a mental disorder.
Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
For major neurocognitive disorder due to HIV infection, with behavioral disturbance,
code first B20 HIV infection, followed by F02.81 major neurocognitive disorder due
to HIV infection, with behavioral disturbance.
For major neurocognitive disorder due to HIV infection, without behavioral
disturbance, code first B20 HIV infection, followed by F02.80 major neurocognitive
disorder due to HIV infection, without behavioral disturbance.
Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be coded for
major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
For mild neurocognitive disorder due to HIV infection, code G31.84. (Note: Do not
use the additional code for HIV infection. “With behavioral disturbance” and “without
behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but should still be recorded.)
718
For major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to HIV infection: Use additional
code(s) to indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to HIV infection
(e.g., F06.34 bipolar and related disorder due to HIV infection, with mixed features;
F07.0 personality change due to traumatic brain injury, apathetic type).
Diagnostic Features
HIV disease is caused by infection with human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1), which
is acquired through exposure to bodily fluids of an infected individual through injection
substance use, unprotected sexual contact, or accidental or iatrogenic exposure (e.g., needle
puncture injury to medical personnel). HIV infects several types of cells, most particularly “T-
helper” (CD4) lymphocytes and monocytes. Over time, the infection can cause severe decreases
in the CD4 count, resulting in severe immunocompromise, often leading to opportunistic
infections and neoplasms. Infected monocytes can enter the central nervous system, leading to
infection of macrophages and microglia. A small percentage of astrocytes may harbor productive
