HIV infection. The advanced form of HIV infection is termed acquired immune deficiency
syndrome (AIDS). Diagnosis of HIV is confirmed by established laboratory methods, such as the
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay for HIV RNA and the
antibody/antigen combination test. Of note, in-home self-testing for HIV is available.
Some individuals with HIV infection develop a neurocognitive disorder (NCD), which
generally shows a “subcortical pattern” with prominently impaired executive function, slowing
of processing speed, problems with more demanding attentional tasks, and difficulty in learning
new information, but fewer problems with recall of learned information. In major NCD, slowing
may be prominent. Language difficulties, such as aphasia, are uncommon, although reductions in
fluency may be observed. HIV pathogenic processes can affect any part of the brain; therefore,
other patterns are possible.
Associated Features
Major or mild NCD due to HIV infection is more prevalent in individuals of increasing age,
lower educational level, or female sex, and among those with major depressive disorder, alcohol
or other substance use disorders, and medical comorbidities (particularly diabetes and
hypertension). The NCD risk due to HIV infection is also increased with any of the following:
prior episodes of immunosuppression, high viral loads in the cerebrospinal fluid, and increased
levels of tumor necrosis factor–alpha (TNF-α), interleukin-6 (IL-6), C-reactive protein, D-dimer,
sCD14, sCD163, and neurofilament light chain in the peripheral blood or clinical laboratory
indicators of advanced HIV disease, such as a low CD4 cell nadir, anemia, and
hypoalbuminemia. Individuals with major NCD may show more prominent neuromotor features,
such as severe incoordination, ataxia, and motor slowing. These features may become more
prominent with NCD disease progression.
Prevalence
Depending on the clinical stage of HIV disease, approximately one-third to over one-half of
HIV-infected individuals have at least some evidence of a neurocognitive disturbance, but most
of these disturbances would not meet criteria for mild NCD and would instead represent
individuals with asymptomatic neurocognitive impairment (ANI), who may have substandard
performance on one or more tests of neurocognitive abilities but do not have any impairment in
functional status. Rates in North America and Western Europe have largely shown that ANI
accounts for the majority of neurocognitive disturbances, whereas mild NCD due to HIV
accounts for approximately one-quarter of individuals, and major NCD criteria are met for
typically less than 5% of individuals with HIV-related neurocognitive disturbances. In Germany,
the overall prevalence of HIV-associated NCDs among HIV
719
clinic participants was 43%, 90% of whom were in treatment: 20% had ANI, 17% had mild
NCD, and 6% had HIV-associated dementia. In low- and middle-income countries, prevalence of
HIV-associated NCDs is higher among untreated individuals with HIV. In other parts of the
world, and in cohorts composed mostly of individuals infected with HIV on effective
antiretroviral treatment tested with comprehensive cognitive test batteries, the overall rates of
