cognitive impairment were found to be around 25%–35%.
In the United States, the incidence of HIV infection is higher in men than in women in every
ethnic group. However, evidence supports a sex difference in NCD due to HIV infection, with
more frequent neurocognitive impairment in women, including when sex is maintained as a risk
factor in a multivariate analysis. The higher rate of impairment in women may be associated with
differences in educational quality.
Development and Course
In the development and course of NCD due to HIV, individuals may have neurocognitive
impairment when the HIV infection is asymptomatic; the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention classifies the underlying HIV infection in three stages: asymptomatic, early
symptomatic, and late symptomatic/AIDS. The course of NCD due to HIV infection can resolve,
improve, remain stable, slowly worsen, rapidly worsen, or have a fluctuating course. Rapid
progression of neurocognitive impairment is uncommon in the context of currently available
combination antiretroviral treatment, although it may still occur in the context of a subgroup
associated with older age, as well as in association with specific comorbidities promoting
cognitive impairment. Nevertheless, for the predominant proportion of individuals with HIV, an
abrupt change in mental status warrants an evaluation of other medical sources for the cognitive
change, including secondary infections. Because HIV infection preferentially affects subcortical
regions over the course of illness, including deep white matter, the progression of the disorder
follows a subcortical pattern. The subcortical pattern of cognitive impairment is characterized by
mental slowing associated with motor dysfunction, procedural learning deficits, and free recall
deficits, with relative sparing of recognition memory, verbal abstraction, and naming.
Because HIV infection can affect a variety of brain regions and the illness can take on many
different trajectories depending on associated comorbidities and the consequences of HIV
infection, the overall course of an NCD due to HIV infection has considerable heterogeneity. A
subcortical neurocognitive profile may interact with age over the life course, such that an
interaction occurs between age and clinical stage of HIV disease in the domains of episodic
memory and motor impairment (e.g., slowed gait). This interaction increases the overall
prevalence of neurocognitive impairment and the likelihood that it will be more pronounced in
later life.
Acquisition of HIV infection typically occurs in adults in high-income countries, via high-
risk behaviors (e.g., unprotected sex; injection substance use) beginning in late adolescence and
peaking during young and middle adulthood, with a significant contribution persisting into older
age. In lower-income regions, where HIV testing and antiretroviral treatments for pregnant
women are not readily available, perinatal transmission is common. The NCD in such infants and
children may manifest primarily as neurodevelopmental delay. As individuals treated for HIV
survive into older age, additive and interactive neurocognitive effects of HIV and aging,
including other NCDs (e.g., due to Alzheimer’s disease, due to Parkinson’s disease), are
possible. More than 50% of individuals with HIV in the United States are older than 50 years.
Long-term antiretroviral therapy is indicated for the ongoing control of HIV infection. However,
some antiretroviral therapy may be associated with inflammation, neurotoxic effects, and
metabolic changes that can lead to vascular compromise and indirectly increase neurocognitive
impairment in conjunction with aging and medical comorbidities that may worsen cognition.
