720
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Paradoxically, NCD due to HIV infection has not declined significantly with the advent of
effective antiretroviral therapy, although the most severe presentations (consistent with the
diagnosis of major NCD) have decreased sharply. Contributory factors may include inadequate
control of HIV in the central nervous system (CNS), the evolution of antiretroviral drug-resistant
viral strains, the effects of chronic long-term systemic and brain inflammation, and the effects of
comorbid factors such as aging, substance use disorder, hypertension, diabetes, past history of
CNS trauma, and co-infections, such as with the hepatitis C virus. Chronic exposure to
antiretroviral drugs has also been associated with neurotoxicity in its own right.
Diagnostic Markers
An HIV diagnosis may be made from a test conducted on the blood, oral fluids, or urine. In
addition, HIV characterization of the cerebrospinal fluid may be helpful if it reveals a
disproportionately high viral load in the cerebrospinal fluid versus in the plasma or if there are
indicators of a high level of neuroinflammation. Neuroimaging (e.g., magnetic resonance
imaging [MRI]) may reveal reduction in total brain volume, cortical thinning, reduction in white
matter volume, and patchy areas of abnormal white matter (hyperintensities). MRI of the brain or
lumbar puncture may be helpful to exclude a specific medical condition (e.g., cryptococcal
meningitis, meningoencephalitis, herpes simplex virus type 1 or type 2 encephalitis, progressive
multifocal leukoencephalopathy) that might contribute to CNS changes in the context of AIDS.
Specialized techniques such as diffusion tensor imaging may reveal damage to specific white
matter tracts. Arterial spin-labeling (ASL) developed as a new type of MRI (ASL-MRI) may
reveal regional changes in brain perfusion in 3–5 minutes without infusion of extrinsic tracers,
and translocator protein 18-kDa (TSPO) positron emission tomography scanning may reveal
neuroinflammation.
Functional Consequences of Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
Due to HIV Infection
Functional consequences of major or mild NCD due to HIV infection are variable across
individuals. Thus, impaired executive functions and slowed information processing may
substantially interfere with adherence to the effective antiretroviral therapy regimens, although
these regimens have been greatly simplified since their inception. Thus, functional status must be
assessed and mapped directly to neurocognitive impairment in order to determine the severity of
the NCD. Functional status related to neurocognitive impairment due to HIV should be separated
from dysfunction attributable to other concomitant disorders that can affect neurocognitive
function.
Differential Diagnosis
In the presence of comorbidities, such as other infections (e.g., hepatitis C virus, syphilis),
substance use disorder (e.g., methamphetamine use disorder), prior traumatic brain injury, or
neurodevelopmental conditions, major or mild NCD due to HIV infection can be diagnosed
