provided there is evidence that infection with HIV has worsened any NCDs because of such
preexisting or comorbid conditions. Among older adults, onset of neurocognitive decline related
to cerebrovascular disease or primary neurodegeneration (e.g., major or mild NCD due to
Alzheimer’s disease) may need to be differentiated; these conditions may be suggested by a
relatively more progressive course of decline than is seen in NCD due to HIV. HIV infection
itself has been shown to increase the risk of cerebrovascular disease. Because more severe
immunodeficiency can result in opportunistic infections of the brain (e.g., toxoplasmosis;
cryptococcosis) and neoplasia (e.g., CNS lymphoma), sudden
721
onset of an NCD or sudden worsening of an NCD demands active investigation of non-HIV
etiologies. Delirium is important to consider because it occurs frequently over the disease course
of individuals with HIV and may be due to multiple etiologies (including SARS-CoV-2 co-
infection).
Comorbidity
HIV disease is accompanied by chronic systemic and CNS inflammation and diseases that can be
associated with an NCD. These complications can be part of the pathogenesis of major or mild
NCD as well as ANI due to HIV infection. HIV frequently co-occurs with conditions such as
substance use disorders and other sexually transmitted infections. Both medical and psychiatric
comorbidities have been identified that increase the likelihood of a diagnosis of NCD due to HIV
infection. Women and members of underserved ethnic and racialized groups may show variation
in the rates of the comorbidities associated with NCD due to HIV infection.
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Prion
Disease
Diagnostic Criteria
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. There is insidious onset, and rapid progression of impairment is common.
C. There are motor features of prion disease, such as myoclonus or ataxia, or
biomarker evidence.
D. The neurocognitive disorder is not attributable to another medical condition and
is not better explained by another mental disorder.
Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
For major neurocognitive disorder due to prion disease, with behavioral disturbance,
code first A81.9 prion disease, followed by F02.81 major neurocognitive disorder
due to prion disease, with behavioral disturbance.
For major neurocognitive disorder due to prion disease, without behavioral
