disturbance, code first A81.9 prion disease, followed by F02.80 major neurocognitive
disorder due to prion disease, without behavioral disturbance.
Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be coded for
major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
For mild neurocognitive disorder due to prion disease, code G31.84. (Note: Do not
use the additional code for prion disease. “With behavioral disturbance” and “without
behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but should still be recorded.)
For major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to prion disease: Use additional
code(s) to indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to prion disease
(e.g., F06.2 psychotic disorder due to prion disease, with delusions; F06.32
depressive disorder due to prion disease with major depressive–like episode).
Diagnostic Features
The classification of major or mild neurocognitive disorder (NCD) due to prion disease includes
NCDs due to a group of subacute spongiform encephalopathies (including sporadic Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease, genetic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, iatrogenic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, variant
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, variably protease-sensitive prionopathy,
722
kuru [found among the Fore people in Papua New Guinea], Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker
syndrome, and fatal insomnia) caused by transmissible agents known as prions. Given that the
most common type is sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, it is typically referred to as simply
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD). Variant CJD is much rarer and is associated with transmission
of bovine spongiform encephalopathy, also called “mad cow disease.” Typically, individuals
with CJD present with neurocognitive deficits, ataxia, and abnormal movements such as
myoclonus, chorea, or dystonia; a startle reflex is also common. The history often reveals rapid
progression to major NCD over as little as 6 months, and thus the disorder is typically seen only
at the major level. However, many individuals with the disorder may have atypical presentations,
and the disease can be confirmed only by biopsy or at autopsy. For example, individuals with
variant CJD may present with a greater preponderance of psychiatric symptoms than do
individuals with other types of prion disease, characterized by low mood, withdrawal, and
anxiety. Although biomarker evidence is not necessarily required for the diagnosis if the motor
features of prion disease (e.g., myoclonus, ataxia) are present, confidence that the NCD is due to
prion disease is greatly increased if characteristic biomarkers are present.
Prevalence
Prevalence is unknown but very low given the short survival. Based on data from nine high-
income countries, the annual incidence of sporadic CJD is approximately one or two cases per
million people. Incidence varies by age and is highest in those age 65 years or older
(4.8/1,000,000 individuals) and is higher in Whites compared with Blacks. Incidence among
ethnic Chinese in Taiwan is lower than general population rates in the United States and other
reporting countries.
