Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Development and Course
Prion disease may develop at any age in adults—the peak age for sporadic CJD is approximately
67 years—although it has been reported to occur in individuals spanning the teenage years to late
life. Non-Latinx Whites were found to have an older mean age at onset compared with other
ethnic and racialized populations in the United States. Prodromal symptoms of prion disease may
include fatigue, anxiety, problems with appetite or sleeping, or difficulties with concentration.
After several weeks, these symptoms may be followed by incoordination, altered vision, or
abnormal gait or other movements that may be myoclonic, choreoathetoid, or ballistic, along
with a rapidly progressive dementia. The disease typically progresses very rapidly to the major
level of impairment over several months. More rarely, it can progress over 2 years and appear
similar in its course to other NCDs.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Cross-species transmission of prion infections, with agents that are closely related
to the human form, has been demonstrated (e.g., the outbreak of bovine spongiform
encephalopathy inducing variant CJD in the United Kingdom during the mid-1990s).
Transmission by corneal transplantation, cadaveric dura mater grafts, contaminated neurosurgical
instruments, cadaver-derived human growth hormone and pituitary gonadotropin injections, and
blood transfusion (only in the case of variant CJD) has been documented. Studies have not
demonstrated an increased risk of sporadic CJD in health care professionals.
In up to 15% of prion disease cases, there are autosomal dominant
genetic mutations in the prion protein gene (PRNP), which encodes for a normal neuronal
membrane–bound protein. The codon 129 polymorphism of PRNP mediates the risk
723
of sporadic and acquired prion diseases as well as modifies clinical manifestation, age at disease
onset, and disease duration.
Diagnostic Markers
Prion disease can be definitively confirmed only by brain biopsy or at autopsy. There are several
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) proteins that are markers of neuronal injury and are frequently elevated
in prion disease; the ones most commonly used for diagnostic purposes are 14-3-3 and tau, which
have high sensitivity but variable specificity. Real-time quaking induced conversion (RT-QuIC)
is another CSF diagnostic test that is able to amplify minute amounts of disease-causing prion
proteins and has extremely high specificity. Magnetic resonance brain imaging is currently
considered the most sensitive diagnostic test when DWI (diffusion-weighted imaging) is
performed, with the most common finding being multifocal gray matter hyperintensities in
subcortical and/or cortical regions. In some individuals, the electroencephalogram reveals
periodic sharp, often triphasic and synchronous discharges at a rate of 0.5–2 Hz at some point
during the course of the disorder. It is important to note that the above diagnostic markers vary
across prion disease type (e.g., sporadic CJD, genetic CJD, variant CJD).
