Other major neurocognitive disorders.
Differential Diagnosis
Major NCD due to prion disease may appear similar in its
course to other NCDs, but prion diseases are typically distinguished by their rapid progression
and prominent cerebellar and motor symptoms.
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to
Parkinson’s Disease
Diagnostic Criteria
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. The disturbance occurs in the setting of established Parkinson’s disease.
C. There is insidious onset and gradual progression of impairment.
D. The neurocognitive disorder is not attributable to another medical condition and
is not better explained by another mental disorder.
Major or mild neurocognitive disorder probably due to Parkinson’s disease
should be diagnosed if 1 and 2 are both met. Major or mild neurocognitive
disorder possibly due to Parkinson’s disease should be diagnosed if 1 or 2 is
met:
1. There is no evidence of mixed etiology (i.e., absence of other neurodegenerative
or cerebrovascular disease or another neurological, mental, or systemic disease
or condition likely contributing to cognitive decline).
2. The Parkinson’s disease clearly precedes the onset of the neurocognitive
disorder.
Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
For major neurocognitive disorder probably or possibly due to Parkinson’s disease,
with behavioral disturbance, code first G20 Parkinson’s disease, followed by F02.81.
For major neurocognitive disorder probably or possibly due to Parkinson’s disease,
without behavioral disturbance, code first G20 Parkinson’s disease, followed by
F02.80.
Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be coded for
major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
724
For mild neurocognitive disorder due to Parkinson’s disease, code G31.84. (Note:
Do not use the additional code for Parkinson’s disease. “With behavioral
disturbance” and “without behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but should still
be recorded.)
For major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to Parkinson’s disease: Use additional
code(s) to indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to Parkinson’s
