disease (e.g., F06.0 psychotic disorder due to Parkinson’s disease, with
hallucinations; F06.31 depressive disorder due to Parkinson’s disease, with
depressive features; F07.0 personality change due to traumatic brain injury,
apathetic type).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of major or mild neurocognitive disorder (NCD) due to Parkinson’s disease
is cognitive decline observed at the time of or following the onset of idiopathic Parkinson’s
disease. The disturbance must occur in the setting of established Parkinson’s disease (Criterion
B), and deficits must have developed gradually (Criterion C). The rate of progression of
cognitive deficits may vary; for some individuals with mild deficits there may be very minimal
change over time.
The NCD is viewed as probably due to Parkinson’s disease when there is no evidence of
another disorder that might be responsible for the cognitive decline and when the Parkinson’s
disease precedes onset of the NCD. The NCD is considered possibly due to Parkinson’s disease
when only one of these conditions is met but not both conditions. A diagnosis of Parkinson’s
disease prior to the onset of the cognitive change increases the diagnostic confidence that the
NCD is attributable to Parkinson’s disease, as denoted by the probable designation.
Associated Features
Frequently present features include apathy, depressed mood, anxious mood, hallucinations,
delusions, personality changes, rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder, excessive
daytime sleepiness, freezing of gait, falls, bilateral involvement early in disease, postural
instability and gait disturbance (PIGD) subtype, and hyposmia. The combination of postural and
gait instability may occur early in the disease and may be described by the term PIGD subtype to
distinguish from tremor-predominant Parkinson’s disease.
Prevalence
The prevalence of Parkinson’s disease in the United States steadily increases with age from
approximately 0.4% between ages 60 and 69 years to 1.4% between ages 80 and 89 years.
Parkinson’s disease is more common in men than in women. Similarly, the prevalence of NCD
due to Parkinson’s disease is higher in men than in women. However, it is not clear if the
incidence of NCD due to Parkinson’s disease is higher in men than in women. Among
individuals with Parkinson’s disease, as many as 80% will eventually develop a major NCD.
Among those without a major NCD, the prevalence of mild NCD in Parkinson’s disease has been
estimated at 25%–27%. For individuals with incident-untreated Parkinson’s disease, a range of
9%–19% have mild NCD, whereas other studies have reported major NCD occurring in 24% of
newly diagnosed untreated Parkinson’s disease. Among African Americans, the risk of
Parkinson’s disease tends to be lower than among non-Latinx Whites, but the risk of dementia
among those with the disease tends to be higher.
Development and Course
Onset of Parkinson’s disease is typically between ages 50 and 89 years, with most expression in
