mental disorder; and a consideration of cross-cutting issues relevant to all disorders. Inclusion of
a proposal for revision in Section II was informed by consideration of its advantages and
disadvantages for public health and clinical utility, the strength of the evidence, and the
magnitude of the change. New diagnoses and disorder subtypes and specifiers were subject to
additional stipulations, such as demonstration of reliability (i.e., the degree to which two
clinicians could independently arrive at the same diagnosis for a given patient). Disorders with
low clinical utility and weak validity were considered for deletion. Placement of proposed
conditions in “Conditions for Further Study” in Section III was contingent on the amount of
empirical evidence generated on the proposed diagnosis, diagnostic reliability or validity,
presence of clear clinical need, and potential benefit in advancing research.
DSM-5 Field Trials
The use of field trials to empirically demonstrate reliability was a noteworthy improvement
introduced in DSM-III. The design and implementation strategy of the DSM-5 Field Trials
represented several changes from approaches used for DSM-III and DSM-IV, particularly in
obtaining data on the precision of kappa reliability estimates (a statistical measure that assesses
level of agreement between raters that corrects for chance agreement due to prevalence rates) in
the context of real-world clinical settings with high levels of diagnostic comorbidity. For DSM-
5, field trials were extended by using two distinctive designs: one in large, diverse medical-
academic settings and the other in routine clinical practices. The former capitalized on the need
for large sample sizes to test hypotheses on
8
reliability and clinical utility of a range of diagnoses in a variety of patient populations; the latter
supplied valuable information about how proposed revisions performed in everyday clinical
settings among a diverse sample of DSM users. It is anticipated that future clinical and basic
research studies will focus on the validity of the revised categorical diagnostic criteria and the
underlying dimensional features of these disorders (including those now being explored by the
NIMH Research Domain Criteria initiative).
The medical-academic field trials were conducted at 11 North American medical-academic
sites from December 2010 to October 2011 and assessed the reliability, feasibility, and clinical
utility of select revisions, with priority given to those that represented the greatest degree of
change from DSM-IV or those potentially having the greatest public health impact. The full
clinical patient populations coming to each site were screened for DSM-IV diagnoses or
qualifying symptoms likely to predict several specific DSM-5 disorders of interest. Stratified
samples of four to seven specific disorders, plus a stratum containing a representative sample of
all other diagnoses, were identified for each site. Patients consented to the study and were
randomly assigned for a clinical interview by a clinician blind to the clinical diagnosis, followed
by a second interview that occurred within 2 weeks with a clinician blind to the diagnoses made
by the first interviewer. Patients first filled out a computer-assisted inventory of cross-cutting
symptoms in more than a dozen psychological domains. These inventories were scored by a
computer, and results were provided to clinicians before they conducted a typical clinical
interview (with no structured protocol). Clinicians were required to score the presence of
