Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Major or mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies (NCDLB).
the early 60s. Mild NCD often develops relatively early in the course of Parkinson’s disease,
whereas major impairment typically does not occur until individuals are older.
725
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Risk factors for Parkinson’s disease include exposure to pesticides, solvents, and
possibly traumatic brain injury.
Potential risk factors for NCD among individuals with Parkinson’s
disease include older age at disease onset, increasing severity of disease, prominent gait
symptoms, severe autonomic disturbance (particularly orthostatic hypotension), REM sleep
behavior disorder, and possibly being a man and having fewer years of formal education.
Individuals with Parkinson’s disease with glucocerebrosidase gene (GBA) mutations and
APOE*E4 genotype have been demonstrated to have worse cognition in cross-sectional and
longitudinal research.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Guam dementia is a late-onset NCD observed among 8.8% of Chamorros (the indigenous
population of Guam) age 65 years and older. Characterized by neurofibrillary tangles but without
the amyloid plaques found in Alzheimer’s disease, it is thought to be possibly related to a unique
parkinsonism-dementia complex and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. An association has been
found with processing and eating fadang made with cycad seeds.
Diagnostic Markers
Neuropsychological testing, with a focus on tests that are not affected by motor slowing (i.e., not
timed or requiring use of hands), is critical in detecting the core cognitive deficits, particularly at
the mild NCD phase. Characteristic features observed in neuropsychological testing early in the
disorder may include reduced attention, executive dysfunction, slowed information processing,
and deficits in memory and visuospatial function, whereas many language skills may remain
intact.
Dopamine transporter scans, such as DaT scans, may differentiate Lewy body–related
dementias (i.e., NCD due to Parkinson’s disease, NCD with Lewy bodies) from non–Lewy
body–related dementias (e.g., NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease).
Differential Diagnosis
726
The distinction between NCDLB
and NCD due to Parkinson’s disease is based on the timing and sequence of motor symptoms
and cognitive symptoms. Consensus criteria for dementia with Lewy bodies separate NCDLB
from NCD due to Parkinson’s disease by specifying that for dementia to be attributed to
Parkinson’s disease, the Parkinson’s disease diagnosis must be present for at least 1 year before
cognitive decline has reached the level of major NCD, whereas for NCDLB, the cognitive
