Major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease.
Major or mild vascular neurocognitive disorder.
Neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition (e.g., neurodegenerative disorders).
Antipsychotic (or other dopamine receptor–blocking drug)–induced parkinsonism.
symptoms may begin before, with, or in the absence of parkinsonism. By contrast, expert
consensus criteria for Parkinson’s disease propose that if cognitive decline occurs prior to a
motor diagnosis, the diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease may still be made; therefore, a clinician
may attribute the cognitive decline to the Parkinson’s disease and diagnose NCD due to
Parkinson’s disease. Consequently, the clinician may choose to diagnose NCD due to
Parkinson’s disease or NCDLB for individuals with major NCD that starts either before or within
12 months of Parkinson’s disease. In such circumstances, the clinician decides which diagnosis
is more appropriate. If Parkinson’s disease has been diagnosed for at least 1 year prior to the
onset of cognitive symptoms, then both expert criteria agree that NCD due to Parkinson’s disease
would typically be the appropriate diagnosis. The timing and sequence of parkinsonism and mild
NCD may be particularly difficult to determine, and unspecified NCD may need to be diagnosed
until the order of clinical progression becomes evident.
The motor features are the key to
distinguishing major or mild NCD due to Parkinson’s disease from major or mild NCD due to
Alzheimer’s disease. However, the two disorders can co-occur, and individuals with well-
established Alzheimer’s disease can develop mild parkinsonism.
Major or mild vascular NCD may manifest with
parkinsonian features that may occur as a consequence of diffuse cortical or subcortical small
vessel disease. However, the parkinsonian features typically are not sufficient for a diagnosis of
Parkinson’s disease, and the course of the NCD usually has a clear association with
cerebrovascular changes.
When 
a
diagnosis of major or mild NCD due to Parkinson’s disease is being considered, the distinction
must also be made from other brain disorders, such as progressive supranuclear palsy,
corticobasal degeneration, multiple system atrophy, tumors, and hydrocephalus.
Antipsychotic 
(or
other dopamine receptor–blocking drug)–induced parkinsonism can occur in individuals with
other NCDs, particularly when antipsychotic medications are prescribed for the behavioral
manifestations of such disorders.
Comorbidity
Parkinson’s disease may coexist with Alzheimer’s disease and cerebrovascular disease,
especially in older individuals. Individuals with NCD due to Parkinson’s disease may display
clinical or biomarker features that suggest the presence of both Parkinson’s disease and other
pathologies. Evidence for mixed etiology does not preclude the contribution of Parkinson’s
disease to an NCD. The compounding of multiple pathological features may diminish the
functional abilities of individuals with Parkinson’s disease. Motor symptoms and frequent co-
occurrence of depression, psychosis, REM sleep behavior disorder, or apathy can make
functional impairment worse.
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to
Huntington’s Disease
