Diagnostic Criteria
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. There is insidious onset and gradual progression.
C. There is clinically established Huntington’s disease, or risk for Huntington’s
disease based on family history or genetic testing.
D. The neurocognitive disorder is not attributable to another medical condition and
is not better explained by another mental disorder.
Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
For major neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease, with behavioral
disturbance, code first G10 Huntington’s disease, followed by F02.81 major
neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease, with behavioral disturbance.
For major neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease, without behavioral
disturbance, code first G10 Huntington’s disease, followed by F02.80 major
neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease, without behavioral disturbance.
Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be coded for
major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
727
For mild neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease, code G31.84. (Note:
Do not use the additional code for Huntington’s disease. “With behavioral
disturbance” and “without behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but should still
be recorded.)
For major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease: Use
additional code(s) to indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to
Huntington’s disease (e.g., F06.31 depressive disorder due to Huntington’s disease
with depressive features; F06.4 anxiety disorder due to Huntington’s disease).
Diagnostic Features
Progressive cognitive impairment is a core feature of Huntington’s disease, with early changes in
executive function (i.e., processing speed, organization, and planning) typically being more
prominent than decline in learning and memory. Cognitive and associated behavioral changes
often precede the emergence of the typical motor abnormalities of bradykinesia (i.e., slowing of
voluntary movement) and chorea (i.e., involuntary jerking movements). A diagnosis of definite
Huntington’s disease is given in the presence of unequivocal, extrapyramidal motor
abnormalities in an individual with either a family history of Huntington’s disease or genetic
testing showing a CAG trinucleotide repeat expansion in the HTT gene, located on chromosome
4.
Associated Features
Irritability, apathy, anxiety, obsessive-compulsive symptoms, depression, and, more rarely,
