Genetic and physiological.
psychosis can all be associated with Huntington’s disease and often precede the onset of motor
symptoms.
Prevalence
Neurocognitive deficits are an eventual outcome of Huntington’s disease; the worldwide
prevalence is estimated to be 2.7 per 100,000. The prevalence of Huntington’s disease in North
America, Europe, and Australia is 5.7 per 100,000, with a much lower prevalence of 0.40 per
100,000 in Asia.
Development and Course
The age at diagnosis of Huntington’s disease varies widely, but symptoms are most often
observed between ages 35 and 45 years. Age at onset is inversely correlated with CAG
expansion length. Juvenile Huntington’s disease (onset before age 20) may present more
commonly with bradykinesia, dystonia, and rigidity than with the choreic movements
characteristic of the adult-onset disorder. The disease is gradually progressive, with the average
length of survival after clinical diagnosis estimated to be approximately 10–20 years, although
affected individuals may demonstrate significant variability in disease progression.
Phenotypic expression of Huntington’s disease varies by presence of motor, cognitive, and
psychiatric symptoms. Psychiatric and cognitive abnormalities can predate the motor
abnormality by a decade or more. Initial symptoms requiring care often include irritabity,
anxiety, or depressed mood. Other behavioral disturbances may include pronounced apathy,
disinhibition, impulsivity, and impaired insight, with apathy often becoming more progressive
over time. Early movement symptoms may involve the appearance of fidgetiness of the
extremities as well as mild apraxia (i.e., difficulty with purposeful movements), particularly with
fine motor tasks. As the disorder progresses, other motor problems include impaired gait (ataxia)
and postural instability. Motor impairment eventually affects speech production (dysarthria)
such that the speech becomes very difficult to understand, which may result in significant
distress resulting from the communication barrier in the context of comparatively intact
cognition. Advanced motor disease severely affects gait with
728
progressive ataxia. Eventually individuals become nonambulatory. End-stage motor disease
impairs motor control of eating and swallowing, typically a major contributor to the death of the
individual from aspiration pneumonia.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
The genetic basis of Huntington’s disease is a fully penetrant autosomal
dominant expansion of the CAG trinucleotide, often called a CAG repeat in the huntingtin gene.
A repeat length of 40 or more is invariably associated with Huntington’s disease, with longer
repeat lengths associated with early age at onset. A CAG repeat length in the 36–39 range is
considered to be partially penetrant, which means that this length could or could not lead to
Huntington’s disease. If Huntington’s disease does occur with repeat lengths in this range, it is
more often associated with onset late in life (diagnosis after age 70).
