Diagnostic Markers
Genetic testing is the primary laboratory test for the determination of Huntington’s disease,
which is an autosomal dominant disorder with complete penetrance. The trinucleotide CAG is
observed to have a repeat expansion in the gene that encodes huntingtin protein on chromosome
4. A diagnosis of Huntington’s disease is not made in the presence of the gene expansion alone,
but the diagnosis is made only after motor symptoms become manifest. Some individuals with a
positive family history request genetic testing in a presymptomatic stage. Associated features
may also include neuroimaging changes; volume loss in the basal ganglia, particularly the
caudate nucleus and putamen, is well known to occur and progresses over the course of illness.
Other structural and functional changes have been observed in brain imaging but remain research
measures.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
In Huntington’s disease, an elevated suicide risk compared with the general population has been
well documented. A literature review and report of data from a large observational study found
that suicide is among the leading causes of death in Huntington’s disease. The elevated risk of
suicidal thoughts in Huntington’s disease has been shown in diagnosed individuals both prior to
and after manifesting the motor symptoms of Huntington’s disease. Risk factors for suicidal
thoughts include depressive symptoms, anxiety, irritability, psychosis, and apathy—emphasizing
the importance of treating depressive symptoms and assessing suicidal thoughts during clinical
monitoring. A large European cohort study of Huntington’s disease similarly found that the most
frequent causes of death were pneumonia (19.5%), other infections (6.9%), and suicide (6.6%).
Functional Consequences of Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
Due to Huntington’s Disease
In the prodromal phase of illness and at early diagnosis, occupational decline is most common,
with most individuals reporting some loss of ability to engage in their typical work. The
emotional, behavioral, and cognitive aspects of Huntington’s disease, such as disinhibition and
personality changes, are highly associated with functional decline. Cognitive deficits that
contribute most to functional decline may include speed of processing, initiation, and attention
rather than memory impairment. Given that Huntington’s disease onset occurs in productive
years of life, it may have a very disruptive effect on performance in the work setting as well as
social life, family life, and important aspects of daily functioning such as driving. As the disease
progresses, disability from problems such as
729
impaired gait, dysarthria, and impulsive or irritable behaviors may substantially add to the level
of impairment and daily care needs, over and above the care needs attributable to cognitive
decline. Severe choreic movements may substantially interfere with provision of care such as
bathing, dressing, and toileting.
Differential Diagnosis
