Other mental disorders.
Other neurocognitive disorders.
Other movement disorders.
Early symptoms of Huntington’s disease may include instability of mood,
irritability, or compulsive behaviors that may suggest another mental disorder. However, genetic
testing or the development of motor symptoms will distinguish the presence of Huntington’s
disease. In such cases, if the mood symptoms are a focus of clinical attention, they may be
indicated by an additional diagnosis of depressive disorder due to Huntington’s disease, with
depressive features.
The early symptoms of Huntington’s disease, particularly
symptoms of executive dysfunction and impaired psychomotor speed, may resemble other
neurocognitive disorders (NCDs), such as major or mild vascular NCD.
Huntington’s disease must also be differentiated from other disorders
or conditions associated with chorea, such as Wilson’s disease, drug-induced tardive dyskinesia,
Sydenham’s chorea, systemic lupus erythematosus, or senile chorea. Rarely, individuals may
present with a course similar to that of Huntington’s disease but without positive genetic testing;
this is considered to be a Huntington’s disease phenocopy that results from a variety of potential
genetic factors.
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Another
Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
that the neurocognitive disorder is the pathophysiological consequence of
another medical condition (e.g., multiple sclerosis).
C. The cognitive deficits are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g.,
major depressive disorder) or another specific neurocognitive disorder (e.g.,
major neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease).
Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
For major neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition, with behavioral
disturbance, code first the other medical condition, followed by the major
neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition, with behavioral
disturbance (e.g., G35 multiple sclerosis, F02.81 major neurocognitive disorder due
to multiple sclerosis, with behavioral disturbance).
For major neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition, without
behavioral disturbance, code first the other medical condition, followed by the major
neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition, without behavioral
disturbance (e.g., G35 multiple sclerosis, F02.80 major neurocognitive disorder due
to multiple sclerosis, without behavioral disturbance).
Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be coded for
major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
