Other major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
730
For mild neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition, code G31.84.
(Note: Do not use the additional code for the other medical condition. “With
behavioral disturbance” and “without behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but
should still be recorded.)
For major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition: Use
additional code(s) to indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to
another medical condition (e.g., F06.32 depressive disorder due to multiple
sclerosis, with major depressive–like episode).
Diagnostic Features
A number of medical conditions can cause neurocognitive disorders (NCDs) other than those
specific etiologies (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease) already included in prior NCD criteria sets in this
chapter. These conditions include structural lesions (e.g., primary or secondary brain tumors,
subdural hematoma, slowly progressive or normal-pressure hydrocephalus), hypoxia related to
hypoperfusion from heart failure, endocrine conditions (e.g., hypothyroidism, hypercalcemia,
hypoglycemia), nutritional conditions (e.g., deficiencies of thiamine or niacin), other infectious
conditions (e.g., neurosyphilis, cryptococcosis), immune disorders (e.g., temporal arteritis,
systemic lupus erythematosus), hepatic or renal failure, metabolic conditions (e.g., Kufs’ disease,
adrenoleukodystrophy, metachromatic leukodystrophy, other storage diseases of adulthood and
childhood), and other neurological conditions (e.g., epilepsy, multiple sclerosis). Unusual causes
of central nervous system injury, such as electrical shock or intracranial radiation, are generally
evident from the history. The temporal association between the onset or exacerbation of the
medical condition and the development of the cognitive deficit offers the greatest support that the
NCD is a pathophysiological consequence of the medical condition. Diagnostic certainty
regarding this relationship may be increased if the neurocognitive deficits ameliorate partially or
stabilize in the context of treatment of the medical condition.
Development and Course
Typically the course of the NCD progresses in a manner that is commensurate with progression
of the underlying medical condition. In circumstances where the medical condition is treatable
(e.g., hypothyroidism), the neurocognitive deficit may improve or at least not progress. When the
medical condition has a deteriorative course (e.g., secondary progressive multiple sclerosis), the
neurocognitive deficits will progress along with the temporal course of illness.
Diagnostic Markers
Associated physical examination and laboratory findings and other clinical features depend on
the nature and severity of the medical condition.
Differential Diagnosis
The presence of an attributable medical condition does
not entirely exclude the possibility of another etiological type of major or mild NCD. If cognitive
