deficits persist following successful treatment of an associated medical condition, then another
etiology may be responsible for the cognitive decline.
731
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Multiple
Etiologies
Diagnostic Criteria
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
that the neurocognitive disorder is the pathophysiological consequence of more
than one etiological process, excluding substances (e.g., neurocognitive disorder
due to Alzheimer’s disease with subsequent development of vascular
neurocognitive disorder).
Note: Refer to the diagnostic criteria for the various neurocognitive disorders
due to specific medical conditions for guidance on establishing the particular
etiologies.
C. The cognitive deficits are not better explained by another mental disorder and do
not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
Coding note (see coding table on pp. 682–683):
For major neurocognitive disorder due to multiple etiologies, code first all of the
etiological medical conditions (with the exception of vascular disease, which is not
coded), followed by either F02.81 for major neurocognitive disorder due to multiple
etiologies, with behavioral disturbance; or F02.80 for major neurocognitive disorder
due to multiple etiologies, without behavioral disturbance.
If vascular disease is among the multiple etiological medical conditions, code next
either F01.51 for major vascular neurocognitive disorder, with behavioral
disturbance; or F01.50 for major vascular neurocognitive disorder, without behavioral
disturbance. Note: The severity specifiers “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe” cannot be
coded for major neurocognitive disorder but should still be recorded.
For example, for a presentation of major neurocognitive disorder, moderate, with a
behavioral disturbance, that is judged to be due to Alzheimer’s disease, vascular
disease, and HIV infection, and in which heavy chronic alcohol use is judged to be a
contributing factor, code the following: G30.9 Alzheimer’s disease, B20 HIV
infection; F02.81 major neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease and HIV
infection, 
moderate, 
with 
behavioral 
disturbance; 
F01.51 
major 
vascular
neurocognitive disorder, moderate, with behavioral disturbance; and F10.27 severe
alcohol use disorder with alcohol-induced major neurocognitive disorder, moderate,
nonamnestic-confabulatory type.
