For mild neurocognitive disorder due to multiple etiologies, code G31.84. (Note: Do
not use the additional codes for the etiologies. “With behavioral disturbance” and
“without behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded but should still be recorded.)
For major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to multiple etiologies: Use additional
code(s) to indicate clinically significant psychiatric symptoms due to the various
etiologies (e.g., F06.2 psychotic disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, with delusions;
F06.31 depressive disorder due to cerebrovascular disease, with depressive
features).
This category is included to cover the clinical presentation of a neurocognitive disorder (NCD)
for which there is evidence that multiple medical conditions have played a probable role in the
development of the NCD. In addition to evidence indicative of the presence of multiple medical
conditions that are known to cause NCD (i.e., findings from the history and physical
examination, and laboratory findings), it may be helpful to refer to the diagnostic criteria and text
for the various medical etiologies (e.g., NCD due to Parkinson’s disease) for more information
on establishing the etiological connection for that particular medical condition.
732
Unspecified Neurocognitive Disorder
R41.9
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a
neurocognitive disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not
meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the neurocognitive disorders
diagnostic class. The unspecified neurocognitive disorder category is used in
situations in which the precise etiology cannot be determined with sufficient certainty
to make an etiological attribution.
Coding note: For unspecified major or mild neurocognitive disorder, code R41.9.
(Note: Do not use additional codes for any presumed etiological medical conditions.
“With behavioral disturbance” and “without behavioral disturbance” cannot be coded
but should still be recorded.)
