qualifying criteria on a computer-assisted DSM-5 diagnostic checklist, determine diagnoses,
score the severity of the diagnosis, and upload the data to a central repository. This study design
allowed the calculation of the degree to which two independent clinicians could agree on a
diagnosis (using the intraclass kappa statistic) and on clinician-administered ratings of cross-
cutting and diagnosis-specific symptom severity (using intraclass correlation coefficients), as
well as the level of agreement on measures of self-reported cross-cutting symptoms, personality
traits, disability, and diagnostic severity administered to the same patient on two occasions up to
2 weeks apart (using intraclass correlation coefficients), along with information on the precision
of these estimates of reliability. It was also possible to assess the prevalence rates of both DSM-
IV and DSM-5 conditions in the respective clinical populations.
The routine clinical practice field trials involved recruitment of individual psychiatrists and
other mental health clinicians and were conducted from October 2011 to March 2012. A
volunteer sample was recruited that included generalist and specialty psychiatrists, psychologists,
licensed clinical social workers, counselors, marriage and family therapists, and advanced
practice psychiatric mental health nurses. The field trials provided exposure of the proposed
DSM-5 diagnoses and dimensional measures to a wide range of clinicians to assess their
feasibility and clinical utility.
Public and Professional Review
In 2010, the APA launched a website devoted to the DSM-5 revision to facilitate public and
professional input into DSM-5. All draft diagnostic criteria and proposed changes in organization
were posted on www.dsm5.org for a 2-month comment period. Feedback totaled more than
8,000 submissions, which were systematically reviewed by each of the 13 work groups, whose
members, where appropriate, integrated questions and comments into discussions of draft
revisions and plans for field trial testing. After revisions to the initial draft criteria and proposed
chapter organization, a second posting occurred in 2011. Work groups considered feedback from
both web postings and the results of the DSM-5 Field Trials when drafting proposed final
criteria, which were posted on the website for a third and final time in 2012. These three
iterations of external review produced more than 13,000 individually signed comments on the
website that were received and reviewed by the work
9
groups, plus thousands of organized petition signers for and against some proposed revisions, all
of which allowed the task force to actively address concerns of DSM users, as well as patients
and advocacy groups, and ensure that clinical utility remained a high priority.
Expert Review and Final Approval
The members of the 13 work groups, representing expertise in their respective areas, collaborated
with advisors and reviewers under the overall direction of the DSM-5 Task Force to draft the
diagnostic criteria and accompanying text. This effort was supported by a team of APA Division
of Research staff and developed through a network of text coordinators from each work group.
The preparation of the text was coordinated by the text editor, working in close collaboration
