Personality Disorders
This chapter begins with a general definition of personality disorder that applies to each of
the 10 specific personality disorders. A personality disorder is an enduring pattern of inner
experience and behavior that deviates markedly from the norms and expectations of the
individual’s culture, is pervasive and inflexible, has an onset in adolescence or early adulthood,
is stable over time, and leads to distress or impairment.
With any ongoing review process, especially one of this complexity, different viewpoints
emerge, and an effort was made to accommodate them. Thus, personality disorders are included
in both Sections II and III. The material in Section II represents an update of text associated with
the same criteria found in DSM-5 (which were carried over from DSM-IV-TR), whereas Section
III includes the proposed model for personality disorder diagnosis and conceptualization
developed by the DSM-5 Personality and Personality Disorders Work Group. As this field
evolves, it is hoped that both versions will serve clinical practice and research initiatives,
respectively.
The following personality disorders are included in this chapter.
Paranoid personality disorder is a pattern of distrust and suspiciousness such that others’ motives are interpreted as
malevolent.
Schizoid personality disorder is a pattern of detachment from social relationships and a restricted range of emotional
expression.
Schizotypal personality disorder is a pattern of acute discomfort in close relationships, cognitive or perceptual distortions,
and eccentricities of behavior.
Antisocial personality disorder is a pattern of disregard for, and violation of, the rights of others, criminality, impulsivity,
and a failure to learn from experience.
Borderline personality disorder is a pattern of instability in interpersonal relationships, self-image, and affects, and
marked impulsivity.
Histrionic personality disorder is a pattern of excessive emotionality and attention seeking.
Narcissistic personality disorder is a pattern of grandiosity, need for admiration, and lack of empathy.
Avoidant personality disorder is a pattern of social inhibition, feelings of inadequacy, and hypersensitivity to negative
evaluation.
Dependent personality disorder is a pattern of submissive and clinging behavior related to an excessive need to be taken
care of.
Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder is a pattern of preoccupation with orderliness, perfectionism, and control.
Personality change due to another medical condition is a persistent personality disturbance that is judged to be the direct
pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition (e.g., frontal lobe lesion).
Other specified personality disorder is a category provided for two situations: 1) the individual’s personality pattern meets
