Criteria
A. An enduring pattern of inner experience and behavior that deviates markedly
from the expectations of the individual’s culture. This pattern is manifested in two
(or more) of the following areas:
1. Cognition (i.e., ways of perceiving and interpreting self, other people, and
events).
2. Affectivity (i.e., the range, intensity, lability, and appropriateness of emotional
response).
3. Interpersonal functioning.
4. Impulse control.
735
B. The enduring pattern is inflexible and pervasive across a broad range of
personal and social situations.
C. The enduring pattern leads to clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The pattern is stable and of long duration, and its onset can be traced back at
least to adolescence or early adulthood.
E. The enduring pattern is not better explained as a manifestation or consequence
of another mental disorder.
F. The enduring pattern is not attributable to the physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition
(e.g., head trauma).
Diagnostic Features
Personality traits are enduring patterns of perceiving, relating to, and thinking about the
environment and oneself that are exhibited in a wide range of social and personal contexts. Only
when personality traits are inflexible and maladaptive and cause significant functional
impairment or subjective distress do they constitute personality disorders. The essential feature
of a personality disorder is an enduring pattern of inner experience and behavior that deviates
markedly from the norms and expectations of the individual’s culture and is manifested in at
least two of the following areas: cognition, affectivity, interpersonal functioning, or impulse
control (Criterion A). This enduring pattern is inflexible and pervasive across a broad range of
personal and social situations (Criterion B) and leads to clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The
pattern is stable and of long duration, and its onset can be traced back at least to adolescence or
early adulthood (Criterion D). The pattern is not better explained as a manifestation or
consequence of another mental disorder (Criterion E) and is not attributable to the physiological
effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, exposure to a toxin) or another
