medical condition (e.g., head trauma) (Criterion F). Specific diagnostic criteria are also provided
for each of the personality disorders included in this chapter.
The diagnosis of personality disorders requires an evaluation of the individual’s long-term
patterns of functioning, and the particular personality features must be evident by early
adulthood. The personality traits that define these disorders must also be distinguished from
characteristics that emerge in response to specific situational stressors or more transient mental
states (e.g., bipolar, depressive, or anxiety disorders; substance intoxication). The clinician
should assess the stability of personality traits over time and across different situations. Although
a single interview with the individual is sometimes sufficient for making the diagnosis, it is often
necessary to conduct more than one interview and to space these over time. Assessment can also
be complicated by the fact that the characteristics that define a personality disorder may not be
considered problematic by the individual (i.e., the traits are often ego-syntonic). To help
overcome this difficulty, supplementary information from other informants may be helpful.
Development and Course
The features of a personality disorder usually become recognizable during adolescence or early
adult life. By definition, a personality disorder is an enduring pattern of thinking, feeling, and
behaving that is relatively stable over time. Some types of personality disorder (notably,
antisocial and borderline personality disorders) tend to become less evident or to remit with age,
whereas this appears to be less true for some other types (e.g., obsessive-compulsive and
schizotypal personality disorders).
Personality disorder categories may be applied with children or adolescents in those
relatively unusual instances in which the individual’s particular maladaptive personality traits
appear to be pervasive, persistent, and unlikely to be limited to a particular
736
developmental stage or attributable to another mental disorder. It should be recognized that
the traits of a personality disorder that appear in childhood will often not persist unchanged into
adult life. For a personality disorder to be diagnosed in an individual younger than 18 years, the
features must have been present for at least 1 year. The one exception to this is antisocial
personality disorder, which cannot be diagnosed in individuals younger than 18 years. Although,
by definition, a personality disorder requires an onset no later than early adulthood, individuals
may not come to clinical attention until relatively late in life. A personality disorder may be
exacerbated following the loss of significant supporting persons (e.g., a spouse) or previously
stabilizing social situations (e.g., a job). However, the development of a change in personality in
middle adulthood or later life warrants a thorough evaluation to determine the possible presence
of a personality change due to another medical condition or an unrecognized substance use
disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Core aspects of personality like emotion regulation and interpersonal functioning are influenced
by culture, which also provides means of protection and assimilation and norms for acceptance
and denunciation of specific behaviors and personality traits. Judgments about personality
