Other mental disorders and personality traits.
functioning must take into account the individual’s ethnic, cultural, and social background.
Personality disorders should not be confused with problems associated with acculturation
following migration or with the expression of habits, customs, or religious and political values
based on the individual’s cultural background or context. Behavioral patterns that appear to be
rigid and dysfunctional aspects of personality disorder may reflect instead adaptive responses to
cultural constraints. For example, reliance on an abusive relationship in a small community
where divorce is proscribed may not reflect pathological dependence; conscientious political
protest that puts friends and family members at risk with authorities or in conflict with legal
norms does not necessarily reflect pathological callousness. There are marked variations in the
recognition and diagnosis of personality disorders across cultural, ethnic, and racialized groups.
Accuracy of diagnosis can be enhanced by attention to culturally patterned conceptions of self
and attachment, assessment biases resulting from clinicians’ own cultural backgrounds or use of
diagnostic instruments that are not normed to the population being assessed, and the impact of
social determinants such as poverty, acculturative stress, racism, and discrimination on feelings,
cognitions, and behaviors. It is useful for the clinician, especially when evaluating someone from
a different background, to obtain additional information from informants who are familiar with
the person’s cultural background.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Certain personality disorders (e.g., antisocial personality disorder) are diagnosed more frequently
in men. Others (e.g., borderline, histrionic, and dependent personality disorders) are diagnosed
more frequently in women; however, in the case of borderline personality disorder, this may be
due to higher help-seeking among women. Nonetheless, clinicians must be cautious not to
overdiagnose or underdiagnose certain personality disorders in women or in men because of
social stereotypes about typical gender roles and behaviors. There is currently insufficient
evidence on differences between cis- and transgender individuals with respect to the
epidemiology or clinical presentations of personality disorders to draw meaningful conclusions.
Differential Diagnosis
Many of the specific criteria for the personality
disorders describe features (e.g., suspiciousness, dependency, insensitivity) that are also
characteristic of episodes of other mental disorders. A personality disorder should
737
be diagnosed only when the defining characteristics appeared before early adulthood, are typical
of the individual’s long-term functioning, and do not occur exclusively during an episode of
another mental disorder. It may be particularly difficult (and not particularly useful) to
distinguish personality disorders from persistent mental disorders such as persistent depressive
disorder that have an early onset and an enduring, relatively stable course. Some personality
disorders may have a “spectrum” relationship to other mental disorders (e.g., schizotypal
personality disorder with schizophrenia; avoidant personality disorder with social anxiety
disorder) based on phenomenological or biological similarities or familial aggregation.
Personality disorders must be distinguished from personality traits that do not reach the
