Psychotic disorders.
Anxiety and depressive disorders.
Posttraumatic stress disorder.
Substance use disorders.
Personality change due to another medical condition.
F60.0
threshold for a personality disorder. Personality traits are diagnosed as a personality disorder
only when they are inflexible, maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant functional
impairment or subjective distress.
For the three personality disorders that may be related to the psychotic
disorders (i.e., paranoid, schizoid, and schizotypal), there is an exclusion criterion stating that the
pattern of behavior must not have occurred exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a
bipolar or depressive disorder with psychotic features, or another psychotic disorder. When an
individual has a persistent mental disorder (e.g., schizophrenia) that was preceded by a
preexisting personality disorder, the personality disorder should also be recorded, followed by
“premorbid” in parentheses.
The clinician must be cautious in diagnosing personality
disorders during an episode of a depressive disorder or an anxiety disorder, because these
conditions may have cross-sectional symptom features that mimic personality traits and may
make it more difficult to evaluate retrospectively the individual’s long-term patterns of
functioning.
When personality changes emerge and persist after an individual
has been exposed to extreme stress, a diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder should be
considered.
When an individual has a substance use disorder, it is important not to
make a personality disorder diagnosis based solely on behaviors that are consequences of
substance intoxication or withdrawal or that are associated with activities in the service of
sustaining substance use (e.g., antisocial behavior).
When enduring changes in personality arise as
a result of the physiological effects of another medical condition (e.g., brain tumor), a diagnosis
of personality change due to another medical condition should be considered.
Cluster A Personality Disorders
Paranoid Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A pervasive distrust and suspiciousness of others such that their motives are
interpreted as malevolent, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety
of contexts, as indicated by four (or more) of the following:
738
1. Suspects, without sufficient basis, that others are exploiting, harming, or
deceiving him or her.
