2. Is preoccupied with unjustified doubts about the loyalty or trustworthiness of
friends or associates.
3. Is reluctant to confide in others because of unwarranted fear that the
information will be used maliciously against him or her.
4. Reads hidden demeaning or threatening meanings into benign remarks or
events.
5. Persistently bears grudges (i.e., is unforgiving of insults, injuries, or slights).
6. Perceives attacks on his or her character or reputation that are not apparent
to others and is quick to react angrily or to counterattack.
7. Has recurrent suspicions, without justification, regarding fidelity of spouse or
sexual partner.
B. Does not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar disorder
or depressive disorder with psychotic features, or another psychotic disorder and
is not attributable to the physiological effects of another medical condition.
Note: If criteria are met prior to the onset of schizophrenia, add “premorbid,” i.e.,
“paranoid personality disorder (premorbid).”
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of paranoid personality disorder is a pattern of pervasive distrust and
suspiciousness of others such that their motives are interpreted as malevolent. This pattern begins
by early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with this disorder assume that other people will exploit, harm, or deceive them,
even if no evidence exists to support this expectation (Criterion A1). They suspect on the basis of
little or no evidence that others are plotting against them and may attack them suddenly, at any
time and without reason. They often feel that they have been deeply and irreversibly injured by
another person or persons even when there is no objective evidence for this. They are
preoccupied with unjustified doubts about the loyalty or trustworthiness of their friends and
associates, whose actions are minutely scrutinized for evidence of hostile intentions (Criterion
A2). Any perceived deviation from trustworthiness or loyalty serves to support their underlying
assumptions. They are so amazed when a friend or associate shows loyalty that they cannot trust
or believe it. If they get into trouble, they expect that friends and associates will either attack or
ignore them.
Individuals with paranoid personality disorder are reluctant to confide in or become close to
others because they fear that the information they share will be used against them (Criterion A3).
They may refuse to answer personal questions, saying that the information is “nobody’s
business.” They read hidden meanings that are demeaning and threatening into benign remarks
or events (Criterion A4). For example, an individual with this disorder may misinterpret an
honest mistake by a store clerk as a deliberate attempt to shortchange, or view a casual humorous
remark by a coworker as a serious character attack. Compliments are often misinterpreted (e.g., a
compliment on a new acquisition is misinterpreted as a criticism for selfishness; a compliment on
an accomplishment is misinterpreted as an attempt to coerce more and better performance). They
may view an offer of help as a criticism that they are not doing well enough on their own.
