Individuals with this disorder persistently bear grudges and are unwilling to forgive the
insults, injuries, or slights that they think they have received (Criterion A5). Minor slights arouse
major hostility, and the hostile feelings persist for a long time. Because they are constantly
vigilant to the harmful intentions of others, they very often feel that their character or reputation
has been attacked or that they have been slighted in some other way. They are quick to
counterattack and react with anger to perceived insults (Criterion A6). Individuals with this
disorder may be pathologically jealous, often suspecting that their spouse
739
or sexual partner is unfaithful without any adequate justification (Criterion A7). They may
gather trivial and circumstantial “evidence” to support their jealous beliefs. They want to
maintain complete control of intimate relationships to avoid being betrayed and may constantly
question and challenge the whereabouts, actions, intentions, and fidelity of their spouse or
partner.
Paranoid personality disorder should not be diagnosed if the pattern of behavior occurs
exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar disorder or depressive disorder with
psychotic features, or another psychotic disorder, or if it is attributable to the physiological
effects of a neurological (e.g., temporal lobe epilepsy) or another medical condition (Criterion
B).
Associated Features
Individuals with paranoid personality disorder are generally difficult to get along with and often
have problems with close relationships. Their excessive suspiciousness and hostility may be
expressed in overt argumentativeness, in recurrent complaining, or by hostile aloofness. They
display a labile range of affect, with hostile, stubborn, and sarcastic expressions predominating.
Their combative and suspicious nature may elicit a hostile response in others, which then serves
to confirm their original expectations.
Because individuals with paranoid personality disorder lack trust in others, they need to have
a high degree of control over those around them. They are often rigid, critical of others, and
unable to collaborate, although they have great difficulty accepting criticism themselves. They
may blame others for their own shortcomings. Because of their quickness to counterattack in
response to the threats they perceive around them, they may be litigious and frequently become
involved in legal disputes. Individuals with this disorder seek to confirm their preconceived
negative notions regarding people or situations they encounter, attributing malevolent
motivations to others that are projections of their own fears. They may exhibit thinly hidden,
unrealistic grandiose fantasies, are often attuned to issues of power and rank, and tend to develop
negative stereotypes of others, particularly those from population groups distinct from their own.
Attracted by simplistic formulations of the world, they are often wary of ambiguous situations.
They may be perceived as “fanatics” and form tightly knit “cults” or groups with others who
share their paranoid belief systems.
Prevalence
The estimated prevalence of paranoid personality based on a probability subsample from Part II
