Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
of the National Comorbidity Survey Replication was 2.3%. The prevalence of paranoid
personality disorder in the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions
was 4.4%. A review of six epidemiological studies (four in the United States) found a median
prevalence of 3.2%. In forensic settings, the estimated prevalence may be as high as 23%.
Development and Course
Paranoid personality disorder may be first apparent in childhood and adolescence with
solitariness, poor peer relationships, social anxiety, underachievement in school, and
interpersonal hypersensitivity. Adolescent onset of paranoid personality disorder is associated
with a prior history of childhood maltreatment, externalizing symptoms, bullying of peers, and
adult appearance of interpersonal aggression.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Exposure to social stressors such as socioeconomic inequality, marginalization,
and racism is associated with decreased trust, which in some cases is adaptive.
740
The combination of social stress and childhood maltreatment accounts for the increased
prevalence of paranoid symptoms in social groups facing racial discrimination. Both longitudinal
and cross-sectional studies confirm that childhood trauma is a risk factor for paranoid personality
disorder.
There is some evidence for an increased prevalence of paranoid
personality disorder in relatives of probands with schizophrenia and for a more specific familial
relationship with delusional disorder, persecutory type.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Some behaviors that are influenced by sociocultural contexts or specific life circumstances may
be erroneously labeled paranoid and may even be reinforced by the process of clinical
evaluation. Migrants, members of socially oppressed ethnic and racialized populations, and other
groups facing social adversity, racism, and discrimination may display guarded or defensive
behaviors because of unfamiliarity (e.g., language barriers or lack of knowledge of rules and
regulations) or in response to the neglect, hostility, or indifference of the majority society. Some
cultural groups develop low generalized trust, especially of outgroup members, which may lead
to behaviors that can be misjudged as paranoid. These include guardedness, limited outward
emotionality, cognitive rigidity, social distance, and hostility or defensiveness in situations
experienced as unfair or discriminatory. These behaviors can, in turn, generate anger and
frustration in others, including clinicians, thus setting up a vicious cycle of mutual mistrust,
which should not be confused with paranoid traits or paranoid personality disorder.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
While paranoid personality disorder was found to be more common in men than in women in a
meta-analysis relying on clinical and community samples, the National Epidemiologic Survey on
