Other mental disorders with psychotic symptoms.
Personality change due to another medical condition.
Substance use disorders.
Paranoid traits associated with physical handicaps.
Other personality disorders and personality traits.
Alcohol and Related Conditions found it to be more common in women.
Differential Diagnosis
Paranoid personality disorder can be distinguished
from delusional disorder, persecutory type; schizophrenia; and a bipolar or depressive disorder
with psychotic features because these disorders are all characterized by a period of persistent
psychotic symptoms (e.g., delusions and hallucinations). For an additional diagnosis of paranoid
personality disorder to be given, the personality disorder must have been present before the onset
of psychotic symptoms and must persist when the psychotic symptoms are in remission. When
an individual has another persistent mental disorder (e.g., schizophrenia) that was preceded by
paranoid personality disorder, paranoid personality disorder should also be recorded, followed by
“premorbid” in parentheses.
Paranoid 
personality 
disorder 
must 
be
distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in which the traits that
emerge are a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
Paranoid personality disorder must be distinguished from symptoms that
may develop in association with persistent substance use.
The disorder must also be distinguished from
paranoid traits associated with the development of physical handicaps (e.g., a hearing
impairment).
741
Other personality disorders may be confused with
paranoid personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is therefore
important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic
features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more
personality disorders in addition to paranoid personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Paranoid
personality disorder and schizotypal personality disorder share the traits of suspiciousness,
interpersonal aloofness, and paranoid ideation, but schizotypal personality disorder also includes
symptoms such as magical thinking, unusual perceptual experiences, and odd thinking and
speech. Individuals with behaviors that meet criteria for schizoid personality disorder are often
perceived as strange, eccentric, cold, and aloof, but they do not usually have prominent paranoid
ideation. The tendency of individuals with paranoid personality disorder to react to minor stimuli
with anger is also seen in borderline and histrionic personality disorders. However, these
disorders are not necessarily associated with pervasive suspiciousness, and borderline personality
disorder exhibits higher levels of impulsivity and self-destructive behavior. People with avoidant
personality disorder may also be reluctant to confide in others, but more from fear of being
embarrassed or found inadequate than from fear of others’ malicious intent. Although antisocial
behavior may be present in some individuals with paranoid personality disorder, it is not usually
motivated by a desire for personal gain or to exploit others as in antisocial personality disorder,
but rather is more often attributable to a desire for revenge. Individuals with narcissistic
personality disorder may occasionally display suspiciousness, social withdrawal, or alienation,
but this derives primarily from fears of having their imperfections or flaws revealed.
