with the work groups and under the direction of the task force chairs. The Scientific Review
Committee (SRC) was established to provide a scientific peer review process that was external to
that of the work groups. The SRC chair, vice-chair, and six committee members were charged
with reviewing the degree to which the proposed changes from DSM-IV could be supported with
scientific evidence. Each proposal for diagnostic revision required a memorandum of evidence
for change prepared by the work group and accompanied by a summary of supportive data
organized around validators for the proposed diagnostic criteria (i.e., antecedent validators such
as familial aggregation, concurrent validators such as biological markers, and prospective
validators such as response to treatment or course of illness). The submissions were reviewed by
the SRC and scored according to the strength of the supportive scientific data. Other
justifications for change, such as those arising from clinical experience or need or from a
conceptual reframing of diagnostic categories, were generally seen as outside the purview of the
SRC. The reviewers’ scores, which varied substantially across the different proposals, and an
accompanying brief commentary were then returned to the APA Board of Trustees and the work
groups for consideration and response.
The Clinical and Public Health Committee (CPHC), composed of a chair, vice-chair, and six
members, was appointed to consider additional clinical utility, public health, and logical
clarification issues for criteria that had not yet accumulated the type or level of evidence deemed
sufficient for change by the SRC. This review process was particularly important for DSM-IV
disorders with known deficiencies for which proposed remedies had neither been previously
considered in the DSM revision process nor been subjected to replicated research studies. These
selected disorders were evaluated by four to five external reviewers, and the blinded results were
reviewed by CPHC members, who in turn made recommendations to the APA Board of Trustees
and the work groups.
Forensic reviews of diagnostic criteria and text were conducted by the members of the APA
Council on Psychiatry and Law for disorders frequently appearing in forensic environments and
ones with high potential for influencing civil and criminal judgments in courtroom settings.
Work groups also added forensic experts as advisors in pertinent areas to complement expertise
provided by the Council on Psychiatry and Law.
A final recommendation from the task force was then provided to the APA Assembly’s
Committee on DSM-5 to consider some of the clinical utility and feasibility features of the
proposed revisions. The Assembly is a deliberative body of the APA representing the district
branches and wider membership that is composed of psychiatrists from throughout the United
States who provide geographic, practice size, and interest-based diversity. The Committee on
DSM-5 was composed of a diverse group of Assembly leaders.
Following the preceding review steps, executive “summit committee” sessions were held to
consolidate input from review, including Assembly committee chairs, task force chairs, a
forensic advisor, and a statistical advisor, for a preliminary review of each disorder by the
Assembly and APA Board of Trustees executive committees. This preceded a preliminary review
by the full APA Board of Trustees. The Assembly voted, in November 2012, to recommend that
the Board approve the publication of DSM-5, and the APA Board
10
of Trustees approved its publication in December 2012. The many experts, reviewers, and
