F60.1
Paranoid traits may be adaptive, particularly in threatening environments. Paranoid
personality disorder should be diagnosed only when these traits are inflexible, maladaptive, and
persisting and cause significant functional impairment or subjective distress.
Comorbidity
Particularly in response to stress, individuals with this disorder may experience very brief
psychotic episodes (lasting minutes to hours). In some instances, paranoid personality disorder
may appear as the premorbid antecedent of delusional disorder or schizophrenia. Individuals
with paranoid personality disorder may develop major depressive disorder and may be at
increased risk for agoraphobia and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Alcohol and other substance
use disorders frequently occur. The most common co-occurring personality disorders appear to
be schizotypal, schizoid, narcissistic, avoidant, and borderline.
Schizoid Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A pervasive pattern of detachment from social relationships and a restricted
range of expression of emotions in interpersonal settings, beginning by early
adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by four (or more) of
the following:
1. Neither desires nor enjoys close relationships, including being part of a
family.
2. Almost always chooses solitary activities.
3. Has little, if any, interest in having sexual experiences with another person.
4. Takes pleasure in few, if any, activities.
5. Lacks close friends or confidants other than first-degree relatives.
742
6. Appears indifferent to the praise or criticism of others.
7. Shows emotional coldness, detachment, or flattened affectivity.
B. Does not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar disorder
or depressive disorder with psychotic features, another psychotic disorder, or
autism spectrum disorder and is not attributable to the physiological effects of
another medical condition.
Note: If criteria are met prior to the onset of schizophrenia, add “premorbid,” i.e.,
“schizoid personality disorder (premorbid).”
Diagnostic Features
