The essential feature of schizoid personality disorder is a pervasive pattern of detachment from
social relationships and a restricted range of expression of emotions in interpersonal settings.
This pattern begins by early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with schizoid personality disorder appear to lack a desire for intimacy, seem
indifferent to opportunities to develop close relationships, and do not seem to derive much
satisfaction from being part of a family or other social group (Criterion A1). They prefer
spending time by themselves, rather than being with other people. They often appear to be
socially isolated or “loners” and almost always choose solitary activities or hobbies that do not
include interaction with others (Criterion A2). They prefer mechanical or abstract tasks, such as
computer or mathematical games. They may have very little interest in having sexual
experiences with another person (Criterion A3) and take pleasure in few, if any, activities
(Criterion A4). There is usually a reduced experience of pleasure from sensory, bodily, or
interpersonal experiences, such as walking on a beach at sunset or having sex. These individuals
have no close friends or confidants, except possibly a first-degree relative (Criterion A5).
Individuals with schizoid personality disorder often seem indifferent to the approval or
criticism of others and do not appear to be bothered by what others may think of them (Criterion
A6). They may be oblivious to the normal subtleties of social interaction and often do not
respond appropriately to social cues so that they seem socially inept or superficial and self-
absorbed. They usually display a “bland” exterior without visible emotional reactivity and rarely
reciprocate gestures or facial expressions, such as smiles or nods (Criterion A7). They claim that
they rarely experience strong emotions such as anger and joy. They often display a constricted
affect and appear cold and aloof. However, in those very unusual circumstances in which these
individuals become at least temporarily comfortable in revealing themselves, they may
acknowledge having painful feelings, particularly related to social interactions.
Schizoid personality disorder should not be diagnosed if the pattern of behavior occurs
exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar or depressive disorder with psychotic
features, another psychotic disorder, or autism spectrum disorder, or if it is attributable to the
physiological effects of a neurological (e.g., temporal lobe epilepsy) or another medical
condition (Criterion B).
Associated Features
Individuals with schizoid personality disorder may have particular difficulty expressing anger,
even in response to direct provocation, which contributes to the impression that they lack
emotion. Their lives sometimes seem directionless, and they may appear to “drift” in their goals.
Such individuals often react passively to adverse circumstances and have difficulty responding
appropriately to important life events. Because of their lack of social skills and lack of desire for
sexual experiences, individuals with this disorder have few friendships, date infrequently, and
often do not marry. Occupational functioning may be impaired, particularly if interpersonal
involvement is required, but individuals with this disorder may do well when they work under
conditions of social isolation.
743
Prevalence
