Genetic and physiological.
Other mental disorders with psychotic symptoms.
Autism spectrum disorder.
Personality change due to another medical condition.
Schizoid personality disorder is uncommon in clinical settings. The estimated prevalence of
schizoid personality disorder based on a probability subsample from Part II of the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication was 4.9%. The prevalence of schizoid personality disorder in
the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions was 3.1%. A review of
six epidemiological studies (four in the United States) found a median prevalence of 1.3%.
Development and Course
Schizoid personality disorder may be first apparent in childhood and adolescence with
solitariness, poor peer relationships, and underachievement in school, which mark these children
or adolescents as different and make them subject to teasing.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Schizoid personality disorder may have increased prevalence in the
relatives of individuals with schizophrenia or schizotypal personality disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Individuals from a variety of cultural backgrounds sometimes exhibit defensive behaviors and
interpersonal styles that may be erroneously labeled as “schizoid.” For example, those who have
moved from rural to metropolitan environments may react with “emotional freezing” that may
last for several months and manifest as solitary activities, constricted affect, and other deficits in
communication. Immigrants from other countries are sometimes mistakenly perceived as cold,
hostile, or indifferent, which may be a response to social ostracism from the host society.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
While some research suggests that schizoid personality disorder may be more common in men,
other research suggests that there is no gender difference in prevalence.
Differential Diagnosis
Schizoid personality disorder can be distinguished
from delusional disorder, schizophrenia, and a bipolar or depressive disorder with psychotic
features because these disorders are all characterized by a period of persistent psychotic
symptoms (e.g., delusions and hallucinations). To give an additional diagnosis of schizoid
personality disorder, the personality disorder must have been present before the onset of
psychotic symptoms and must persist when the psychotic symptoms are in remission. When an
individual has a persistent psychotic disorder (e.g., schizophrenia) that was preceded by schizoid
personality disorder, schizoid personality disorder should also be recorded, followed by
“premorbid” in parentheses.
There may be great difficulty differentiating individuals with schizoid
personality disorder from individuals with autism spectrum disorder, particularly with milder
forms of either disorder, as both include a seeming indifference to companionship with others.
However, autism spectrum disorder may be differentiated by stereotyped behaviors and interests.
Schizoid 
personality 
disorder 
must 
be
