Substance use disorders.
Other personality disorders and personality traits.
F21
distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in which the traits that
emerge are a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
744
Schizoid personality disorder must also be distinguished from symptoms
that may develop in association with persistent substance use.
Other personality disorders may be confused with
schizoid personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore,
important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic
features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more
personality disorders in addition to schizoid personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Although
characteristics of social isolation and restricted affectivity are common to schizoid, schizotypal,
and paranoid personality disorders, schizoid personality disorder can be distinguished from
schizotypal personality disorder by the lack of cognitive and perceptual distortions and from
paranoid personality disorder by the lack of suspiciousness and paranoid ideation. The social
isolation of schizoid personality disorder can be distinguished from that of avoidant personality
disorder, which is attributable to fear of being embarrassed or found inadequate and excessive
anticipation of rejection. In contrast, people with schizoid personality disorder have a more
pervasive detachment and limited desire for social intimacy. Individuals with obsessive-
compulsive personality disorder may also show an apparent social detachment stemming from
devotion to work and discomfort with emotions, but they do have an underlying capacity for
intimacy.
Individuals who are “loners” or quite introverted may display personality traits that might be
considered schizoid, consistent with the broader conceptualization of schizoid personality
disorder as a disorder defined by pathological introversion/detachment. Only when these traits
are inflexible and maladaptive and cause significant functional impairment or subjective distress
do they constitute schizoid personality disorder.
Comorbidity
Particularly in response to stress, individuals with this disorder may experience very brief
psychotic episodes (lasting minutes to hours). In some instances, schizoid personality disorder
may appear as the premorbid antecedent of delusional disorder or schizophrenia. Individuals
with this disorder may sometimes develop major depressive disorder. Schizoid personality
disorder most often co-occurs with schizotypal, paranoid, and avoidant personality disorders.
Schizotypal Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A pervasive pattern of social and interpersonal deficits marked by acute
discomfort with, and reduced capacity for, close relationships as well as by
