cognitive or perceptual distortions and eccentricities of behavior, beginning by
early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or
more) of the following:
1. Ideas of reference (excluding delusions of reference).
2. Odd beliefs or magical thinking that influences behavior and is inconsistent
with subcultural norms (e.g., superstitiousness, belief in clairvoyance,
telepathy, or “sixth sense”; in children and adolescents, bizarre fantasies or
preoccupations).
3. Unusual perceptual experiences, including bodily illusions.
4. Odd thinking and speech (e.g., vague, circumstantial, metaphorical,
overelaborate, or stereotyped).
5. Suspiciousness or paranoid ideation.
6. Inappropriate or constricted affect.
745
7. Behavior or appearance that is odd, eccentric, or peculiar.
8. Lack of close friends or confidants other than first-degree relatives.
9. Excessive social anxiety that does not diminish with familiarity and tends to
be associated with paranoid fears rather than negative judgments about self.
B. Does not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar disorder
or depressive disorder with psychotic features, another psychotic disorder, or
autism spectrum disorder.
Note: If criteria are met prior to the onset of schizophrenia, add “premorbid,” e.g.,
“schizotypal personality disorder (premorbid).”
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of schizotypal personality disorder is a pervasive pattern of social and
interpersonal deficits marked by acute discomfort with, and reduced capacity for, close
relationships as well as by cognitive or perceptual distortions and eccentricities of behavior. This
pattern begins by early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with schizotypal personality disorder often have ideas of reference (i.e., incorrect
interpretations of casual incidents and external events as having a particular and unusual
meaning specifically for the person) (Criterion A1). These should be distinguished from
delusions of reference, in which the beliefs are held with delusional conviction. These
individuals may be superstitious or preoccupied with paranormal phenomena that are outside the
norms of their subculture (Criterion A2). They may feel that they have special powers to sense
events before they happen or to read others’ thoughts. They may believe that they have magical
control over others, which can be implemented directly (e.g., believing that their spouse’s taking
the dog out for a walk is the direct result of thinking an hour earlier it should be done) or
indirectly through compliance with magical rituals (e.g., walking past a specific object three
times to avoid a certain harmful outcome). Perceptual alterations may be present (e.g., sensing
