that another person is present or hearing a voice murmuring their name) (Criterion A3). Their
speech may include unusual or idiosyncratic phrasing and construction. It is often loose,
digressive, or vague, but without actual derailment or incoherence (Criterion A4). Responses can
be either overly concrete or overly abstract, and words or concepts are sometimes applied in
unusual ways (e.g., the individual may state that he or she was not “talkable” at work).
Individuals with this disorder are often suspicious and may have paranoid ideation (e.g.,
believing their colleagues at work are intent on undermining their reputation with the boss)
(Criterion A5). They are usually not able to negotiate the full range of affects and interpersonal
cuing required for successful relationships and thus often appear to interact with others in an
inappropriate, stiff, or constricted fashion (Criterion A6). These individuals are often considered
to be odd or eccentric because of unusual mannerisms, an often unkempt manner of dress that
does not quite “fit together,” and inattention to the usual social conventions (e.g., the individual
may avoid eye contact, wear clothes that are ink stained and ill-fitting, and be unable to join in
the give-and-take banter of co-workers) (Criterion A7).
Individuals with schizotypal personality disorder experience interpersonal relatedness as
problematic and are uncomfortable relating to other people. Although they may express
unhappiness about their lack of relationships, their behavior suggests a decreased desire for
intimate contacts. As a result, they usually have no or few close friends or confidants other than a
first-degree relative (Criterion A8). They are anxious in social situations, particularly those
involving unfamiliar people (Criterion A9). They will interact with other individuals when they
have to but prefer to keep to themselves because they feel that they are different and just do not
“fit in.” Their social anxiety does not easily abate, even when they spend more time in the setting
or become more familiar with the other people, because their anxiety tends to be associated with
suspiciousness regarding others’ motivations. For example, when attending a dinner party, the
individual with schizotypal
746
personality disorder will not become more relaxed as time goes on, but rather may become
increasingly tense and suspicious.
Schizotypal personality disorder should not be diagnosed if the pattern of behavior occurs
exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar or depressive disorder with psychotic
features, another psychotic disorder, or autism spectrum disorder (Criterion B).
Associated Features
Individuals with schizotypal personality disorder often seek treatment for the associated
symptoms of anxiety or depression rather than for the personality disorder features per se.
Prevalence
The estimated prevalence of schizotypal personality disorder based on a probability subsample
from Part II of the National Comorbidity Survey Replication was 3.3%.The prevalence of
schizotypal personality disorder in the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related
Conditions data was 3.9%. A review of five epidemiological studies (three in the United States)
found a median prevalence of 0.6%.
