Genetic and physiological.
Other mental disorders with psychotic symptoms.
Development and Course
Schizotypal personality disorder has a relatively stable course, with only a small proportion of
individuals going on to develop schizophrenia or another psychotic disorder. Schizotypal
personality disorder may be first apparent in childhood and adolescence with solitariness, poor
peer relationships, social anxiety, underachievement in school, hypersensitivity, peculiar
thoughts and language, and bizarre fantasies. These children may appear “odd” or “eccentric”
and attract teasing.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Schizotypal personality disorder appears to aggregate familially and is
more prevalent among the first-degree biological relatives of individuals with schizophrenia than
among the general population. There may also be a modest increase in schizophrenia and other
psychotic disorders in the relatives of probands with schizotypal personality disorder. Twin
studies indicate highly stable genetic factors and rather transient environmental factors for an
increased risk for the schizotypal syndrome, and genetic risk variants for schizophrenia may be
linked to schizotypal personality disorder. Neuroimaging studies detect group-level differences
in the size and function of specific brain regions in individuals with schizotypal personality
disorder in comparison with healthy persons, individuals with schizophrenia, and individuals
with other personality disorders.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Cognitive and perceptual distortions must be evaluated in the context of the individual’s cultural
milieu. Pervasive culturally determined characteristics, particularly those regarding supernatural
and religious beliefs and practices (life beyond death, speaking in tongues, voodoo, shamanism,
mind reading, sixth sense, evil eye, magical beliefs related to health and illness), can appear to be
schizotypal to the uninformed clinician. Thus, observed cross-national and cross-ethnic
variations in the prevalence and expression of schizotypal traits may be a true epidemiological
finding or one due to differences in the cultural acceptance of these experiences.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Schizotypal personality disorder appears to be slightly more common in men than in women.
747
Differential Diagnosis
Schizotypal 
personality 
disorder 
can 
be
distinguished from delusional disorder, schizophrenia, and a bipolar or depressive disorder with
psychotic features because these disorders are all characterized by a period of persistent
psychotic symptoms (e.g., delusions and hallucinations). To give an additional diagnosis of
schizotypal personality disorder, the personality disorder must have been present before the onset
of psychotic symptoms and persist when the psychotic symptoms are in remission. When an
individual has a persistent psychotic disorder (e.g., schizophrenia) that was preceded by
schizotypal personality disorder, schizotypal personality disorder should also be recorded,
