Neurodevelopmental disorders.
Personality change due to another medical condition.
Substance use disorders.
Other personality disorders and personality traits.
followed by “premorbid” in parentheses.
There may be great difficulty differentiating children with
schizotypal personality disorder from the heterogeneous group of solitary, odd children whose
behavior is characterized by marked social isolation, eccentricity, or peculiarities of language
and whose diagnoses would probably include milder forms of autism spectrum disorder or
language communication disorders. Communication disorders may be differentiated by the
primacy and severity of the disorder in language and by the characteristic features of impaired
language found in a specialized language assessment. Milder forms of autism spectrum disorder
are differentiated by the even greater lack of social awareness and emotional reciprocity and
stereotyped behaviors and interests.
Schizotypal personality disorder must be
distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in which the traits that
emerge are a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
Schizotypal personality disorder must also be distinguished from
symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use.
Other personality disorders may be confused with
schizotypal personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore,
important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic
features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more
personality disorders in addition to schizotypal personality disorder, all can be diagnosed.
Although paranoid and schizoid personality disorders may also be characterized by social
detachment and restricted affect, schizotypal personality disorder can be distinguished from these
two diagnoses by the presence of cognitive or perceptual distortions and marked eccentricity or
oddness. Close relationships are limited in both schizotypal personality disorder and avoidant
personality disorder; however, in avoidant personality disorder an active desire for relationships
is constrained by a fear of rejection, whereas in schizotypal personality disorder there is a lack of
desire for relationships and persistent detachment. Individuals with narcissistic personality
disorder may also display suspiciousness, social withdrawal, or alienation, but in narcissistic
personality disorder these qualities derive primarily from fears of having imperfections or flaws
revealed. Individuals with borderline personality disorder may also have transient, psychotic-like
symptoms, but these are usually more closely related to affective shifts in response to stress (e.g.,
intense anger, anxiety, disappointment) and are usually more dissociative (e.g., derealization,
depersonalization). In contrast, individuals with schizotypal personality disorder are more likely
to have enduring psychotic-like symptoms that may worsen under stress but are less likely to be
invariably associated with pronounced affective symptoms. Although social isolation may occur
in borderline personality disorder, it is usually secondary to repeated interpersonal failures due to
angry outbursts and frequent mood shifts, rather than a result of a persistent lack of social
contacts and desire for intimacy. Furthermore, individuals with schizotypal personality disorder
do not usually demonstrate the impulsive or manipulative behaviors of the individual with
748
borderline personality disorder. However, there is a high rate of co-occurrence between the two
disorders, so that making such distinctions is not always feasible. Schizotypal features during
