The essential feature of antisocial personality disorder is a pervasive pattern of disregard for, and
violation of, the rights of others that begins in childhood or early adolescence and continues into
adulthood. This pattern has also been referred to as psychopathy, sociopathy, or dyssocial
personality disorder. Because deceit and manipulation are central features of antisocial
personality disorder, it may be especially helpful to integrate information acquired from
systematic clinical assessment with information collected from collateral sources.
749
For this diagnosis to be given, the individual must be at least age 18 years (Criterion B) and
must have had evidence of conduct disorder with onset before age 15 years (Criterion C).
Conduct disorder involves a repetitive and persistent pattern of behavior in which the basic rights
of others or major age-appropriate societal norms or rules are violated. The specific behaviors
characteristic of conduct disorder fall into one of four categories: aggression to people and
animals, destruction of property, deceitfulness or theft, or serious violation of rules.
The pattern of antisocial behavior continues into adulthood. Individuals with antisocial
personality disorder fail to conform to social norms with respect to lawful behavior (Criterion
A1). They may repeatedly perform acts that are grounds for arrest (whether they are arrested or
not), such as destroying property, harassing others, stealing, or pursuing illegal occupations.
Persons with this disorder disregard the wishes, rights, or feelings of others. They are frequently
deceitful and manipulative in order to gain personal profit or pleasure (e.g., to obtain money, sex,
or power) (Criterion A2). They may repeatedly lie, use an alias, con others, or malinger. A
pattern of impulsivity may be manifested by a failure to plan ahead (Criterion A3). Decisions are
made on the spur of the moment, without forethought and without consideration for the
consequences to self or others; this may lead to sudden changes of jobs, residences, or
relationships. Individuals with antisocial personality disorder tend to be irritable and aggressive
and may repeatedly get into physical fights or commit acts of physical assault (including spouse
beating or child beating) (Criterion A4). (Aggressive acts that are required to defend oneself or
someone else are not considered to be evidence for this item.) These individuals also display a
reckless disregard for the safety of themselves or others (Criterion A5). This may be evidenced
in their driving behavior (i.e., recurrent speeding, driving while intoxicated, multiple accidents).
They may engage in sexual behavior or substance use that has a high risk for harmful
consequences. They may neglect or fail to care for a child in a way that puts the child in danger.
Individuals with antisocial personality disorder also tend to be consistently and extremely
irresponsible (Criterion A6). Irresponsible work behavior may be indicated by significant periods
of unemployment despite available job opportunities, or by abandonment of several jobs without
a realistic plan for getting another job. There may also be a pattern of repeated absences from
work that are not explained by illness either in themselves or in their family. Financial
irresponsibility is indicated by acts such as defaulting on debts, failing to provide child support,
or failing to support other dependents on a regular basis. Individuals with antisocial personality
disorder show little remorse for the consequences of their acts (Criterion A7). They may be
indifferent to, or provide a superficial rationalization for, having hurt, mistreated, or stolen from
someone (e.g., “life’s unfair,” “losers deserve to lose”). These individuals may blame the victims
for being foolish, helpless, or deserving their fate (e.g., “he had it coming anyway”); they may
minimize the harmful consequences of their actions; or they may simply indicate complete
